SM22CALPONIN
Calponin is a smooth muscle-specific, actin-, tropomyosin- and calmodulin-
binding protein believed to be involved in regulation or modulation of 
contraction [1,2]; interaction of the protein with actin inhibits actomyosin 
MgATPase activity. Multiple isoforms are found in smooth muscle [2].

Calponin is a basic protein of ~34kDa [3]. The protein contains three 
repeats of a well-conserved 26-residue domain, which is also found in a 
variety of proteins whose physiological role is as yet unclear (these 
include vertebrate smooth muscle protein (SM22 or transgelin), Drosophila
synchronous flight muscle protein, C.elegans unc-87 protein, and rat
neuronal protein NP25).

SM22-alpha is expressed exclusively in smooth muscle-containing tissues of
adult animals and is one of the earliest markers of differentiated smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) [4]. SM22-alpha mRNA is expressed at high levels in the aorta,
uterus, lung, and intestine, and in primary cultures of rat aortic SMCs,
and the SMC line, A7r5 [4].

Transgelin is the product of a single gene that is conserved in yeast,
Drosophila, molluscs and humans [5], and is highly similar to several other
proteins of unknown function (including mouse p27 and human WS3-10). The 
smaller domains of similarity shared between transgelin and other proteins, 
such as rat NP25, chicken calponins alpha and beta, and Drosophila mp20,
suggest that these proteins may be classified as members of a new transgelin
multigene family [5]. 

SM22CALPONIN is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
the calponin/SM22 family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 8 lies in the
C-terminal calponin-like domain encoded by PROSITE pattern CALPONIN
(PS01052). Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 23 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are fragments and/or
SM22/calponin homologues that fail to match one or more motifs. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 17 sequences, and 8
partial matches.
