MITOCARRIER
A variety of substrate carrier proteins that are involved in energy transfer
are found in the inner mitochondrial membrane [1-4]. Such proteins include:
ADP,ATP carrier protein (ADP/ATP translocase); 2-oxoglutarate/malate carrier
protein; phosphate carrier protein; tricarboxylate transport protein (or 
citrate transport protein); Graves disease carrier protein; yeast mito-
chondrial proteins MRS3 and MRS4; yeast mitochondrial FAD carrier protein;
and many others.

Sequence analysis of selected members of the carrier protein family has
suggested the presence of six transmembrane (TM) domains, with varying 
degrees of sequence conservation and hydrophilicity [2]. The TM regions,
and adjacent hydrophilic loops, are more highly conserved than other
regions of the proteins [2]. All members of the family appear to consist
of a tripartite structure, each of the repeated segments being ~100 residues
in length [2]. Each repeat contains two TM domains, the first being more
hydrophobic, with conserved glycyl and prolyl residues. Five of the six TM
domains are followed by the conserved sequence (D/E)-Hy(K/R){where - denotes
any residue, and Hy is a hydrophobic position} [2].

MITOCARRIER is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
ADP/ATP mitochondrial carrier proteins. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1
lies in the first putative TM domain; motif 2 includes the C-terminal
residues of TM domain 1, and spans the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
MITOCH_CARRIER (PS00215); motif 3 lies in the second TM domain; motif 4
includes the C-terminal residues of putative TM domain 3; motif 5 spans
TM domain 4; and motif 6 spans putative TM domain 5. Three iterations on
OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 71 sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches were also
found, all of which are fragments or closely related mitochondrial carrier
proteins that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 61 sequences, and 9
partial matches.
