DELTAOPIOIDR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The term opioid refers to a class of substance that produces its effects
via the major classes of opioid receptor, termed mu, delta and kappa [6].
The delta opioid receptor has a more discrete distribution in the CNS
relative to the mu and kappa opioid receptors: it is found in the cerebral
cortex, amygdala, nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle and pontine
nucleus. It is also found in certain smooth muscles, e.g. hamster vas
deferens, and in cell lines [6]. Delta-receptors mediate analgesia.

DELTAOPIOIDR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
delta opioid receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the delta opioid receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the opioid receptor family - motifs 1
and 2 were drawn from the N-terminal region preceding TM domain 1; motifs
3 and 4 lie in the second and third external loops; and motifs 5 and 6 were
drawn from the C-terminal region following TM domain 7. Two iterations on
OWL27.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 4 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences.
