ARGSUCLYASE
The vertebrate lens is a transparent tissue containing high levels of
soluble protein, packed with short-range order in precisely aligned,
elongated cells [1]. In birds, the main lens proteins are the alpha-, 
beta- and delta-crystallins. Mammalian lenses have a lower water
content than their avian counterparts, and contain gamma- instead
of delta-crystallins.

Delta-crystallin evolved in a common ancestor of reptiles and birds, by
the overexpression in the lens of argininosuccinate lyase, an enzyme 
involved in arginine biosynthesis [2]. At this time, a gene duplication 
took place, since when the lens gene has accumulated mutations in the 
coding sequence, leading to changes in its enzymatic activity. The protein
belongs to a superfamily of distantly-related metabolic enzymes, all of
which are active as homotetramers: they include fumarase, aspartase, 
adenylosuccinase and 3-carboxy-cis,cis-muconate lactonising enzyme. 

The structure of delta-crystallin comprises mainly alpha-helical domains
[1,3-5]. One domain is a bundle of 5 long helices, which forms a 20-helix
bundle at the core of the tetramer. The structure reveals a putative
active-site cleft, located on the boundary between 3 subunits of the
tetramer.

ARGSUCLYASE (formerly DCRYSTALLIN) is a 6-element fingerprint that provides
a signature for the arginosuccinate lyases. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 29 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, motif 5 including the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern FUMARATE_LYASES (PS00163). Two iterations
on OWL25.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 18 sequences was identified. Fourteen partial matches were also
found, all of which are members of the fumarate lyase superfamily that match 
motifs 2, 4 and 5: these include class II fumarases, aspartases, 
adenylosuccinases and 3-carboxy-cis,cis-muconate lactonising enzyme. 

An update on SPTR55_38f identified a true set of 780 sequences, and
numerous partial matches, all of which are members of the argininosuccinate
lyase family that fail to make significant matches with 1 or more motifs.
