CAPILLOPTASE
Proteolytic enzymes that use serine in their catalytic machinery are 
widespread and numerous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes
[1]. They encompass a range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase,
endopeptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase. More than 20 serine
protease families (denoted S1 - S27) have been identified, which have been
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
and functional similarities [1]. Structures from four clans have been
examined (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be unrelated, suggesting at 
least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidase, and possibly many more
[1]. Since that examination, structural representations from the other two 
clan members (SF, SG) have been determined [3].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

Two additional clans (PA and PB) have been identified, these containing a
mixture of serine, cysteine and threonine proteases. Clan PA contains a
catalytically-active serine or cysteine nucleophilic residue as part of the
ordered triad His, Asp, Ser (or Cys). Clan PB contains a serine, cysteine or
threonine active residue at the N-terminus of the mature protease [3]. 

Capillovirus 36kDa peptidases and non-peptidase homologues belong to the
S35 serine protease family, which is part of the PA clan [3,4]. In a number
of capilloviruses that have been sequenced to date, an ORF has been 
identified that contains the consensus sequence Gly-Asp-Ser-Gly common
to the active site of a number of serine proteases [5]. Capilloviruses
infect a number of different plant species, and can be detected by the 
presence of virions in leaf sap [6].

CAPILLOPTASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
capillovirus serine proteases and their non-peptidase homologues (the S35
serine protease family). The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length. Two iterations on OWL31.1 
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising
7 sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
