LEADERPTASE
Proteolytic enzymes that exploit serine in their catalytic activity are
ubiquitous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes [1]. They 
include a wide range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase, endo-
peptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase activity. Over 20 families
(denoted S1-S26) of serine protease have been identified, these being
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
similarity and other functional evidence [1]. Structures are known for four
of the clans (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be totally unrelated,
suggesting at least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidases and
possibly many more [1].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and 
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

At least 3 eubacterial leader peptidases are known: murein prelipoprotein 
peptidase, which cleaves the leader peptide from a component of the
bacterial outer membrane; type IV prepilin leader peptidase; and the serine-
dependent leader peptidase 1, which has the more general role of cleaving
the leader peptide from a variety of secreted proteins and proteins directed
to the periplasm and periplasmic membrane [1]. Leader peptidase 1 is
similar to the eukaryotic signal peptidase, although the bacterial protein
is monomeric, while the eukaryotic protein is multimeric [1].

Mitochondria contain a similar two-subunit serine protease that removes
leader peptides from nuclear- and mitochondrially-encoded proteins, which
localise in the inner mitochondrial space [1]. The catalytic residues of a
number of these peptides have been identified as a serine/lysine dyad [1].

LEADERPTASE is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
bacterial leader peptidase 1 (S26A) family. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern SPASE_I_1 (PS00501), which contains the
catalytic serine; motif 2 includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
SPASE_I_2 (PS00760), which contains the active lysine; and motif 3 includes
the region encoded by PROSITE pattern SPASE_I_3 (PS00761), a conserved
C-terminal region of unknown function. Two iterations on OWL29.3 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 23
sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 42 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
