DNAPOLI
DNA	carries the biological information that instructs cells how to exist
in an ordered fashion: accurate replication is thus one of the most
important events in the cell life cycle. This function is mediated by
DNA-directed DNA-polymerases, which add nucleotide triphosphate (dNTP)
residues to the 5'-end of the growing DNA chain, using a complementary 
DNA as template. Small RNA molecules are generally used as primers for
chain elongation, although terminal proteins may also be used.

DNA-dependent DNA-polymerases have been grouped into families, denoted A, B
and X, on the basis of sequence similarities [1,2].	Members of family A, 
which includes bacterial and bacteriophage polymerases, share significant
similarity to E.coli polymerase I; hence family A is also known as the pol I
family. The	bacterial polymerases also contain an exonuclease activity,
which is coded for in the N-terminal portion. 

Three motifs, A, B and C, as defined by Delarue et al. [2], are seen to be 
conserved across all DNA-polymerases, with motifs A and C also seen in RNA- 
polymerases. They are centered on invariant residues, and their structural 
significance was implied from the Klenlow (E.coli) structure: motif A 
contains a strictly-conserved aspartate at the junction of a beta-strand 
and an alpha-helix; motif B contains an alpha-helix with positive charges; 
and motif C has a doublet of negative charges, located in a beta-turn-beta 
secondary structure [2]. 

DNAPOLI is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the DNA-
polymerase A family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 14 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in the
C-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 spans strands 7 and 8, and
helix 16, and contains a conserved Arg, which binds a metal ion; motif 2 
straddles helix 17; motif 3 spans strand 9 and helix 19; motif 4 encompasses
"motif A", which contains one of the active site Asps; motif 5 spans the 
region encoded by PROSITE pattern DNA_POLYMERASE_A (PS00447), corresponding
to "motif B", which contains the strictly conserved active site Lys and the
conserved Tyr residue; motif 6 spans the C-terminal section of helix 24 and
the start of helix 25; motif 7 straddles strands 10 and 11; motif 8 spans
the central portion of helix 26; and motif 9 includes "motif C", which 
contains an active site Asp. Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 28 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are true
but distant family members, including two yeast gamma polymerases. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 26 sequences, and 15
partial matches.
