CANNABINOIDR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The ability of marijuana to activate the cannabinoid receptor provides a
molecular explanation for its psychoactive effects and other CNS actions
(which include hallucinations, memory deficits, altered time and space
perception, CNS depression and appetite stimulation) [6]. The endogenous
ligand at the cannabinoid receptor is unknown, although it may be a
derivative of arachidonic acid. The cannabinoid receptor is widespread
throughout the CNS, high levels occurring in the dendate gyrus, hippocampus
and cerebral cortex, with more moderate levels in the hypothalamus and
amygdala. It is also present in various cell lines, and in the periphery
it is found in the testis and vas deferens [6].

CANNABINOIDR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cannabinoid receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections   
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the 
alignment that characterise the cannabinoid receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies in the 
N-terminal region immediately preceding TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the
central portion of TM domain 1; motif 3 lies in the first cytoplasmic loop;
motif 4 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 2 and the first external loop;
motif 5 lies in the second external loop; motif 6 lies at the C-terminus of
TM domain 5; motif 7 was drawn from the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs
8 and 9 lie at the N- and C-termini of TM domain 7. Two iterations on
OWL27.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 6 sequences was identfied. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are members of the melanocortin/melanotropin receptor
family that match motifs 2 and 9.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 9 sequences.
