RNGMNOXGNASE
Dioxygen can be incorporated directly into organic compounds in reactions 
catalysed by enzymes termed oxygenases or hydroxylases: oxygenases that
catalyse the incorporation of both atoms of dioxygen into substrates are
known as dioxygenases; those that catalyse the incorporation of only one
atom of dioxygen are termed monooxygenases, or mixed-function oxygenases.
The second atom of dioxygen is reduced to H2O either by the substrates
themselves or by a co-substrate reductant [1].

One of the first steps in aerobic degradation of aromatic compounds
involves introduction of one or two hydroxyl groups onto the aromatic ring.
Incorporation of single hydroxyl groups (monohydroxylation) is generally
catalysed by monooxygenases. In bacteria, the majority of monooxygenases
catalysing monohydroxylation of aromatic rings of substituted phenols are
single-component flavoenzymes, although multi-component monooxygenases,
such as phenol and toluene-4 monooxygenase, have also been found.

The structure and reaction mechanism of a bacterial single-component
aromatic-ring hydroxylase, para-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (PHBH), have
been characterised [2]. Monooxygenases of this class can be divided into
several subgroups. Local sequence similarities between the group of PHBH
and salicylate hydroxylase and that of dichlorophenol and phenol
hydroxylases are confined to 2 regions [1]. In the first of these, at the
N-terminus, a conserved ADP-binding motif is found associated with a beta-
alpha-beta fold [3]: in PHBH, this region binds the ADP portion of FAD; in
dichlorophenol and phenol hydroxylases, however, it may be involved in
binding NADPH rather than FAD, since highly-conserved Asp or Glu residues
associated with NADH or FAD binding are absent. The second region of
similarity (residues 276-329 in PHBH), may be involved in FAD binding as,
in the 3D structure of PHBH, this region contains an FAD-binding beta-
strand. With the exception of these 2 regions, the sequences of
flavoprotein monooxygenases vary significantly.

RNGMNOXGNASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial aromatic-ring hydroxylases (flavoprotein monooxygenases). The 
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 14 sequences: motif 1
corresponds to the ADP binding site; motifs 3-6 were drawn from the region
associated with flavin binding in PHBH (residues 278-344). Two iterations 
on OWL26.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 19 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also 
found: VISC_ECOLI, YBJ8_YEAST and A55767 match the first 4 motifs; 
BCH3_RHOCA matches the first 3 motifs; UBIH_ECOLI matches motifs 1, 2 and 4;
and most of the sequences matching only 2 motifs (one of which is motif 1)
are FAD-containing oxidoreductases.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 30 sequences, and 49
partial matches.
