RPERETINALR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) hosts a putative GPCR. The RPE-retinal 
GPCR (RGR) covalently binds all-trans- and 11-cis-retinal after reduction
by sodium borohydride [6]. All-trans-retinal is bound preferentially over
the 11-cis isomer. The human sequence is 86% identical to that of bovine
RGR [6,7], and a lysine residue, analogous to the retinaldehyde attachment
site of rhodopsin, is conserved in TM domain 7 [6]. The human gene, whose
structure is distinct from that of the visual pigment genes, spans 14.8 kb
and is split into 7 exons [6]. This suggests that the rgr gene represents
the earliest independent branch of the vertebrate opsin gene family [6].
Since the RGR gene product preferentially binds all-trans-retinal, it is 
thought that one of its functions may be to catalyse isomerisation of the
chromophore by a retinochrome-like mechanism [6].

RPERETINALR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
RPE-retinal GPCRs. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections largely within
loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the RGR receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the opsin family - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 spans the first
cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 lies
in the second external loop; motif 5 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop;
motif 6 spans the third external loop; and motif 7 lies at the C-terminus.
A single iteration on OWL29.0 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences.
