LACTALBUMIN
Alpha-lactalbumin comprises 15 percent of the total human milk protein and
is essential for lactose production [1]. It is a globular calcium-binding 
metalloprotein secreted in the lactating mammary gland [2], the calcium
being bound in a novel binding loop that is superficially similar to the 
classic EF-hand motif. Lactalbumin attaches to beta-galactosyltransferase 
on the luminal surface of the Golgi apparatus, creating the lactose 
synthetase complex [1], which catalyses the addition of galactose to
glucose, forming lactose. The lactalbumin gene also contains a novel
upstream regulatory sequence called the 'milk box' [3], which is also found
in genes of other milk proteins, and may be involved in either hormone
regulation or tissue-specific expression in the lactating mammary gland.

Alpha-lactalbumin is similar to C-type lysozyme in terms of primary 
sequence and structure [4], and has probably evolved from a common 
ancestral protein. There is, however, no similarity in function, lysozyme 
being involved in the hydrolysis of bacterial cell wall polysaccharides, 
lactalbumin playing an essential role in milk production. Another
difference between the enzymes is that whereas all lactalbumins have the
ability to bind calcium, this property is restricted to only a few
lysozymes [5]. It was first suggested that calcium binding stabilised the 
structure and protected it from heat denaturation, but recently it has 
been claimed that calcium controls the release of lactalbumin from the 
golgi membrane and that the pattern of ion binding may also affect the 
catalytic properties of the lactose synthetase complex.

LACTALBUMIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
alpha-lactalbumins and distinguishes them from the lysozymes. The 
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: motif 4 
encodes the calcium binding region, and motif 3 contains 2 of 8 cysteine 
residues conserved in both lysozymes and lactalbumins (cf. PROSITE pattern
LACTALBUMIN_LYSOZYME (PS00128)). Two iterations on OWL20.0 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 17 sequences was
identified. Five partial matches were also found, all of which are
lysozymes, most matching motifs 1 and 3.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 17 sequences, and 1
partial match.
