ASTACIN
The astacin family of metalloendopeptidases encompasses a range of proteins
found in hydra to humans, in mature and developmental systems [1]. Their
functions include activation of growth factors, degradation of polypeptides,
and processing of extracellular proteins [1]. The proteins are synthesised
with N-terminal signal and pro-enzyme sequences, and many contain multiple
domains C-terminal to the protease domain. They are either secreted from
cells, or are associated with the plasma membrane.

The astacin molecule adopts a kidney shape, with a deep active-site cleft
between its N- and C-terminal domains [2]. The zinc ion, which lies at the
bottom of the cleft, exhibits a unique penta-coordinated mode of binding,
involving 3 histidine residues, a tyrosine and a water molecule (which is
also bound to the carboxylate side chain of Glu93) [2]. The N-terminal
domain comprises 2 alpha-helices and a 5-stranded beta-sheet. The overall
topology of this domain is shared by the archetypal zinc-endopeptidase
thermolysin. Astacin protease domains also share common features with
serralysins, matrix metalloendopeptidases, and snake venom proteases; they
cleave peptide bonds in polypeptides such as insulin B chain and bradykinin,
and in proteins such as casein and gelatin; and they have arylamidase
activity [1]. 

ASTACIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
astacin family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions within
the central portion of the alignment, motif 2 including the region encoded
by PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142), the histidines of which are
zinc ligands and the glutamic acid the active site residue - motifs 1 and 2
span the two N-terminal domain alpha helices; motifs 3 and 4 encode
C-terminal domain beta strands; and motif 5 spans the C-terminal domain
C-terminal helix. Two iterations on OWL27.0 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 31 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found: some are astacin
family members that fail to make significant matches motifs 1 or 5;
UVS2_XENLA is a fragment lacking the portion of sequence bearing the first
3 motifs; and the rest are members of the zinc protease superfamily that
match motifs 1 and 2. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 60 sequences, and 28
partial matches.
