ZETAHAEM
Globins are haem-containing proteins involved in dioxygen binding and/or 
transport [1]. Hundreds of globin sequences are known [2]. It has been 
proposed that all globins have evolved from a family of ancestral, ~17kDa 
haemoproteins that displayed the globin fold and functioned as redox 
proteins [3]. The globin superfamily includes vertebrate haemoglobins (Hb); 
vertebrate myoglobins (Mb); invertebrate globins; plant leghaemoglobins; and 
bacterial flavohaemoglobins. 

The function of haemoglobins (Hb) is transport of dioxygen in blood plasma.
Hb binds O(2) in the reduced [Fe(II)] state. The Hb molecule exists as a
tetramer, typically of two alpha- and two beta-globin chains, which form 
a well-defined quaternary structure. Each monomer binds iron protoporphyrin
IX (haem). 

The 3D structures of a great number of vertebrate Hbs in various states
are known. The protein is largely alpha-helical, eight conserved helices 
(A to H) providing the scaffold for a well-defined haem-binding pocket
(Hb alpha subunits lack helix D [4]). The imidazole ring of the "proximal"
His residue provides the fifth haem iron ligand; the other axial haem iron 
position remains essentially free for O(2) coordination. Conserved "distal"
His and Val residues block an unhindered access to the sixth coordination 
site so that a controlled binding of small molecules may result only as a 
consequence of side-chain dynamics of the protein [1]. O(2) binding results
in a transition from high-spin to low-spin iron, with accompanying changes 
in the Fe-N bond lengths and coordination geometry. In Hb, these subtle 
changes lead to the well-known cooperative effect. At the quaternary 
structure level, O(2) binding induces relative reorientation of the 
[alpha-1, beta-1] and [alpha-2, beta-2] dimers. 

It has been hypothesised that the embryonic alpha-haemoglobin family
diverged considerably earlier than the beta-haemoglobin line [5]. This
is reflected in a greater variability amongst alpha sequences, such that
two distinct sub-groups may be distinguished; these have been designated
pi and zeta.

ZETAHAEM is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
zeta family of haemoglobins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that 
characterise the zeta-haemoglobins but distinguish them from the rest of
the globin family - motif 1 includes the N-terminus of helix 1; motif 2 
spans the C-terminal half of the loop between helices 4 and 5, leading 
into helix 5; motif 3 encompasses helices 6 and 7; and motif 4 spans the 
C-terminal portion of helix 10. A single iteration on OWL30.0 was required
to reach convergence, no further sequence being identified beyond the
starting set. A single partial match was found, HBAD_BRACA, a Canada goose
alpha-D haemoglobin that fails to match motifs 1 and 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
