ANGIOTENSN1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Angiotensin II is the principal mediator of the renin-angiotensin system;
it circulates in the bloodstream, stimulating vasoconstriction and
retention of salt and water [6]. It also stimulates increased fluid intake
and regulates the neuroendocrine system. Many of its actions are mediated
by release of hormones from endocrine glands, e.g. vasopressin, catechol-
amines, aldosterone, growth-hormone, etc.. Molecular cloning studies have
identifed 2 major receptor subtypes, designated AT1 and AT2. 

AT1 receptors are the major subclass of the angiotensin family. The
receptors are found in blood vessels, other smooth muscles (e.g., the
uterus and bladder), and endocrine glands [6]. Receptors are also present
in the kidney, liver and on presynaptic nerve terminals, where they 
potentiate release of noradrenaline [6]. They are distributed widely in 
the CNS and are present in high levels in the hypothalamus and anterior
pituitary, where they stimulate release of vasopressin and ACTH res. [6].
AT1 receptors inhibit adenylyl cyclase and activate phosphoinositide
metabolism via a pertussis-toxin-insensitive G protein, probably of the
Gq/G11 class [6].

ANGIOTENSN1R is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
AT1 angiotensin II receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 16 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
largely within loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the AT1 receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the angiotensin family - motifs 1 and 2 span the N-terminus,
leading into TM domain 1; motif 3 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 5,
leading into the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of
the third cytoplasmic loop and part of TM domain 6; motif 5 lies in the
N-terminal portion of TM domain 7; and motifs 6-8 span the C-terminus. A
single iteration on OWL29.0 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. A single partial match
was also found, PN0449, a turkey angiotensin II receptor fragment.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 15 sequences.
