KCNECHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].

Some types of K+ channel are closed at the resting potential of the cell,
but open on membrane depolarisation, and are thus known as voltage-gated 
channels. Each of these types of channel typically comprises 4 pore-forming
alpha subunits that may associate with one of a number of different types of
beta subunit. Two types of beta subunit (KCNE and KCNAB) are presently known
to associate with voltage-gated alpha subunits (Kv, KCNQ and eag-like).
However, not all combinations of alpha and beta subunits are possible.
The KCNE family of K+ channel subunits are membrane glycoproteins that 
possess a single transmembrane (TM) domain. They share no structural 
relationship with the alpha subunit proteins, which possess pore forming 
domains. The subunits appear to have a regulatory function, modulating the 
kinetics and voltage dependence of the alpha subunits of voltage-dependent
K+ channels [2]. KCNE subunits are formed from short polypeptides of ~130
amino acids, and are divided into five subfamilies: KCNE1 (MinK/IsK),
KCNE2 (MiRP1), KCNE3 (MiRP2), KCNE4 (MiRP3) and KCNE1L (AMMECR2).

KCNECHANNEL is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
KCNE voltage-gated K+ channel family E. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spannning the central portion of the alignment: motifs 1 and 2 span
the TM domain; and motif 3 spans the C-terminus of the TM domain and the
N-terminus of the cytoplasmic tail. Two iterations on SPTR39.22_17.3f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 14
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR57_40f identified a true set of 18 sequences. Two partial  
matches were also found, Q8AWZ9_XENLA and Q8AWZ8_XENLA, which are frog 
translated mRNA sequences that fail to make a significant match to motif 1.
