MTNEMATODE
Metallothioneins (MT) are small proteins that bind heavy metals, such as
zinc, copper, cadmium, nickel, etc.. They have a high content of cysteine
residues that bind the metal ions through clusters of thiolate bonds [1-3]
(http://www.unizh.ch/~mtpage/MT.html). An empirical classification into
three classes has been proposed by Fowler et al. [4] and Kojima [5]. Members
of class I are defined to include polypeptides related in the positions of
their cysteines to equine MT-1B, and include mammalian MTs as well as MTs 
from crustaceans and molluscs. Class II groups MTs from a variety of 
species, including sea urchins, fungi, insects and cyanobacteria. Class
III MTs are atypical polypeptides composed of gamma-glutamylcysteinyl
units [4]. 

This original classification system has been found to be limited, in the
sense that it does not allow clear differentiation of patterns of structural
similarities, either between or within classes. Consequently, all class I
and class II MTs (the proteinaceous sequences) have now been grouped into
families of phylogenetically-related and thus alignable sequences [6]
(http://www.unizh.ch/~mtpage/classif.html). This system subdivides the MT
superfamily into families, subfamilies, subgroups, and isolated isoforms
and alleles. 

The metallothionein superfamily comprises all polypeptides that resemble
equine renal metallothionein in several respects [4]: e.g., low molecular
weight; high metal content; amino acid composition with high Cys and low
aromatic residue content; unique sequence with characteristic distribution
of cysteines, and spectroscopic manifestations indicative of metal thiolate
clusters. A MT family subsumes MTs that share particular sequence-specific 
features and are thought to be evolutionarily related. The inclusion of a
MT within a family presupposes that its amino acid sequence is alignable 
with that of all members. Fifteen MT families have been characterised, each
family being identified by its number and its taxonomic range: e.g., Family
1: vertebrate MTs.

Nematode (family 6) MTs are 62-74 residue proteins, containing 18 conserved
cysteines and binding 6 cadmium ions. The protein also binds cations of
several transition elements. The cysteine residues are arranged in C-X-C
and X-C-C-X groups. In particular, the consensus pattern K-C-C-x(3)-C-C has
been found to be diagnostic of family 6 metallothioneins. The protein is 
induced by cadmium, and is abundantly and exclusively expressed in the
intestinal cells of larvae and adult animals [7].

MTNEMATODE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for nematode
(family 6) metallothioneins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: motif 1 contains 5 metal-binding Cys residues;
motif 2 includes 6 cysteines and spans the characteristic consensus pattern;
and motifs 3 and 4 encode 4 and 5 Cys residues respectively. A single
iteration on OWL30.1 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences
being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches were found,
MTA_COLVI and MTB_COLVI both of which are avian metallothionein fragments
that match motifs 1 and 3.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified no further sequences.
