RECOVERIN
Recoverin, a retinal calcium-binding protein, participates in the recovery
phase of visual excitation and in adaption to light [1]. The Ca2+-bound
form of recoverin prolongs the photoresponse, presumably by blocking
phosphorylation of photoexcited rhodopsin. Recoverin contains a covalently-
attached myristoyl group, or acyl group, at its N-terminus, and 2 Ca2+-
binding sites. Ca2+ binding to myristoylated recoverin induces its
translocation to bilayer membranes, indicating that the myristoyl group
is essential to the read-out of calcium signals (calcium-myristoyl switch).

The solution structure of Ca2+-free, myristoylated recombinant recoverin
reveals the myristoyl group to be sequestered in a deep hydrophobic 
pocket formed by several aromatic and other hydrophobic residues from
5 flanking helices [1]. Overall, the structure contains 11 helices and 2
pairs of short anti-parallel beta-sheets. Four pairs of helices constitute
4 EF-hand type helix-loop-helix structural motifs.  

A moderate degree of sequence similarity exists between recoverin and a
group of homologues that includes visinin, hippocalcin, neurocalcin,
S-modulin, visinin-like protein, and frequenin. Several hydrophobic
residues are conserved within these sequences, especially the aromatic
residues that contribute to the myristoyl-binding pocket, suggesting that
the structure of the pocket is similar in all family members.

RECOVERIN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
recoverin family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length - motifs 1 and 2 encode the first 2
helices; motif 3 spans helices 4 and 5 and the short intervening strand;
motif 4 encodes helix 6; motif 5 spans strand 3 and helix 7; motif 6
encodes part of helix 9; and motif 7 spans the final 2 helices. Two
iterations on OWL26.3 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 23 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found, including sequences that fail to make significant matches
with one or more motifs and a number of fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 26 sequences, and 11
partial matches.
