ISLETAMYLOID
Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) (also known as diabetes-associated peptide
or amylin) is a pancreatic islet hormone that is stored with insulin in beta
cell granules [1]. IAPP has a propensity to form islet cell-disrupting 
amyloid deposits, and opposes the action of insulin in peripheral tissues; 
the peptide may therefore have a significant role in the development of Type
2 diabetes mellitus [1]. It is thought that an intrinsic structural motif of
IAPP, which only occurs in species that develop age-associated or Type 2 
diabetes (e.g., humans and cats), is linked to its amyloidogenicity [1].

IAPP is a short, 37-residue peptide. The hormone selectively inhibits 
insulin-stimulated glucose utilisation and glycogen deposition in muscle,
but does not affect adipocyte glucose metabolism. The sequences of amylin
and the calcitonin gene-related peptides (CGRPs) show strong similarity:
both peptides have a conserved N-terminal intramolecular disulphide bridge,
and both have a C-terminal glycine, which suggests that the C-terminal
residue of amylin, like that of CGRP, is amidated [2].

Near- and far-UV CD spectra of human alpha CGRP, analogues and fragments of
CGRP, and amylin have been recorded in aqueous solution and in trifluoro-
ethanol/water mixtures [3]. The peptides were shown to contain significant
amounts of alpha-helix in aqueous solution, this amount increasing upon 
addition of TFE. Amylin appears to contain less helix than CGRP [3].

ISLETAMYLOID is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
islet amyloid peptides. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 encodes the putative signal
sequence; and motifs 2-4 span the amyloid peptide, motif 2 including part of
the region encoded by PROSITE pattern CALCITONIN (PS00258), which contains 
the two N-terminal Cys residues that form a disulphide-linked loop. A single
iteration on OWL30.0 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences
being identified beyond the starting set. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are related calcitonins that match motifs 2 and 4. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 9 sequences.
