OPSINRH1RH2
Opsins, the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision [1,2], are
integral membrane proteins that belong to a superfamily of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs). The activating ligands of the different superfamily
members vary widely in structure and character, yet the proteins appear
faithfully to have conserved a basic structural framework, believed to
consist of 7 transmembrane (TM) helices. Although the sequences of these
proteins are very diverse, reflecting to some extent this broad range of
activating ligands, nevertheless, motifs have been identified in the TM
regions that are characteristic of virtually the entire superfamily [3,4].
Amongst the exceptions are the olfactory receptors, which cluster together
in a subfamily, which lacks significant matches with domains 2, 4 and 6.
Interestingly, the opsins also seem to be emerging as increasingly atypical
of the superfamily, clustering most strongly, in phylogenetic analyses, with
the olfactory receptors [4]. 

The visual pigments comprise an apoprotein (opsin), covalently linked to
the chromophore 11-cis-retinal. The covalent link is in the form of a
protonated Schiff base between the retinal and a lysine residue located in
TM domain 7. Vision is effected through the absorption of a photon by the
chromophore, which is isomerised to the all-trans form, promoting a
conformational change in the protein.

By contrast with vertebrate rhodopsin, which is found in rod cells, insect
photoreceptors are found in the ommatidia that comprise the compound eyes.
Each Drosophila eye has 800 ommatidia, each of which contains 8 photo-
receptor cells (designated R1-R8): R1-R6 are outer cells, while R7 and R8
are inner cells. Opsins RH1 and RH2 have absorption maxima at 480nm and
420nm respectively [5-7].

OPSINRH1RH2 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
RH1 and RH2 opsins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the RH1/RH2 opsins but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the N-terminus;
motif 3 spans the first external loop; motif 4 lies in the third cytoplasmic
loop; motif 5 lies in the third external loop; and motifs 6 and 7 span the
C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL28.1 was required to reach convergence, 
no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are closely related opsins.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 11
partial matches.
