GEMCOATCLVL1
Geminiviruses are characterised by a genome of circular single-stranded
DNA encapsidated in twinned (geminate) quasi-isometric particles, from
which the group derives its name [1]. Most geminiviruses can be divided
into 2 subgroups on the basis of host range and/or insect vector: i.e.
those that infect dicotyledenous plants and are transmitted by the same
whitefly species, and those that infect monocotyledenous plants and are
transmitted by different leafhopper vectors. The genomes of the whitefly-
transmitted cassava latent (CLV), tomato golden mosaic (TGMV) and bean
golden mosaic (BGMV) viruses possess a bipartite genome. By contrast, only
a single DNA component has been identified for the leafhopper-transmitted 
maize streak (MSV) and wheat dwarf (WDV) viruses [2,3]. Beet curly top
(BCTV), bean summer death and tobacco yellow dwarf viruses belong to a 
third possible subgroup. Like MSV and WDV, BCTV is transmitted by a 
specific leafhopper species, yet like the whitefly-transmitted gemini- 
viruses it has a host range confined to dicotyledenous plants.

Sequence comparison of the whitefly-transmitted squash leaf curl [4]
and tomato yellow leaf curl viruses [5,6] with the genomic components of
TGMV and BGMV reveals a close evolutionary relationship [4]. Amino acid
sequence alignments of potato yellow mosaic viral (PYMV) proteins with 
those encoded by other geminiviruses show that PYMV is closely related 
to geminiviruses isolated from the New World, especially in the putative 
coat protein gene regions [7].

GEMCOATCLVL1 is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
geminivirus CLV group AL1 coat proteins. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the full alignment length. Two iterations on OWL23.2 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 18
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of
which appear to belong to a subfamily of related AL1 coat proteins from
the leafhopper-transmitted geminiviruses.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 57 sequences, and 27
partial matches.
