GPR6ORPHANR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Several 7TM receptors have been cloned but their endogenous ligands are
unknown; these have been termed orphan receptors. A new GPCR, GPR12, was
isolated from a rat pituitary library, and is found in discrete regions
of the brain, pituitary and testis, but is absent in other tissues [6-8].
Three human homologues (GPR12, GPR6 and GPR3) have also been isolated [7].
The 3 genes have been localised to human chromosomal regions 13q12, 6q21
and 1p34.3-p36.1 respectively. 

GPR6ORPHANR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
GPR6 orphan receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the GPR6 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the GPR family - motifs 1-4 span the N-terminus; motif 5 spans the second
cytoplasmic loop; motif 6 spans the third external loop; and motif 7 resides
at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL29.0 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences.
