OCTOPAMINER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The insect octopamine receptor mediates the attenuation of adenylate cyclase 
activity. Sequence and pharmacological comparisons indicate that the 
octopamine receptor is unique, but closely related to mammalian adrenergic 
receptors, perhaps as an evolutionary precursor [6,7]. 

OCTOPAMINER is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
octopamine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the octopamine receptors but distinguish them from the rest
of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies in the N-terminal region
leading into TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 3
lies in the first external loop; motif 4 lies in the second external loop; 
motifs 5 and 6 lie in the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 7 lies in the
third external loop. A single iteration on OWL29.1 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. 
A single partial match was found, D83547, a Balanus amphitrite homologue.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
