CCCHEMOKINER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Chemokines are proteins that have important physiological and patho- 
physiological roles in a wide range of acute and chronic inflammatory
processes [6]. Their sequences are similar and are characterised by a 
4-cysteine motif: the family can be divided according to whether the
first 2 Cys residues are adjacent (the C-C family), or separated by an
intervening residue (the C-x-C family). C-C chemokines are chemoattractant
for monocytes but not for neutrophils. The C-C family includes human
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), regulated on activation, normal
T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), and macrophage inflammatory proteins
(MIP-1a and MIP-1b) [6].

C-C chemokine receptors are found in monocytes, lymphocytes, basophils and
eosinophils; mRNA is also found in some cell lines [6]. MCP-1 and MIP-1a
induce activation in low nanomolar concentrations and are highly selective
relative to C-x-C receptors. Calcium mobilisation has been demonstrated in
monocytes and in cells expressing the recombinant C-C receptor via an
uncharacterised G protein; pertussis toxin inhibits some of its actions [6].

CCCHEMOKINER is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
C-C chemokine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections 
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment 
that characterise the C-C chemokine receptors but distinguish them from the 
rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus, 
leading into TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 
lies in the first external loop; motif 4 lies in the N-terminal portion of 
TM domain 3; motif 5 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 6 lies in the
N-terminal portion of TM domain 7; and motif 7 lies at the C-terminus. Two 
iterations on OWL29.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a 
true set comprising 18 sequences was identified. Several partial matches 
were also found, all of which are closely related members of the superfamily
(most of these match motifs 3 and 7).

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 31 sequences, and 48
partial matches.
