RIBSOMALS12E
Ribosomes are ribonucleoprotein particles that are the site of protein
synthesis. The structure of the ribosome is well conserved across the
prokaryotic and eukaryotic lineages, reflecting the early origin of their
essential function. They comprise two subunits, which can dissociate on 
heating. In prokaryotes, the small subunit contains a single large RNA 
moeity denoted, according to its sedimentation coefficient, 16S rRNA, and 21 
different ribosomal proteins, designated S1-S21. Eukaryotic small ribosomal
subunits contain 33 proteins, many of which are similar to those found
in prokaryotes. 

There are two major tRNA binding sites on the ribosome, termed the A site, 
where incoming aminoacyl-tRNA is bound, and the P site (for peptidyl tRNA), 
where new peptide bonds are formed. The ribosomal proteins catalyse ribosome 
assembly and stabilise the rRNA, tuning the structure of the ribosome for 
optimal function [1]. Evidence suggests that, in prokaryotes, the peptidyl
transferase reaction is performed by the large subunit 23S rRNA, whereas
proteins probably have a greater role in eukaryotic ribosomes. Most of the
proteins lie close to, or on the surface of, the 30S subunit, arranged
peripherally around the rRNA [2]. The small subunit ribosomal proteins can
be categorised as primary binding proteins, which bind directly and
independently to 16S rRNA; secondary binding proteins, which display no
specific affinity for 16S rRNA, but its assembly is contingent upon the
presence of one or more primary binding proteins; and tertiary binding
proteins, which require the presence of one or more secondary binding
proteins and sometimes other tertiary binding proteins.

The small ribosomal subunit protein S12 contains 130-150 amino acid residues,
and is thought to be involved in the translation initiation step. Eukaryotic 
S12 ribosomal proteins include: vertebrate S12 [4]; Trypanosoma brucei S12
[5]; Caenorhabditis elegans S12 (F54E7.2); Drosophila S12; and yeast S12.

RIBSOMALS12E is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
eukaryotic S12 ribosomal proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved 
regions spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 includes most of the
N-terminal region encoded by PROSITE pattern RIBOSOMAL_S12E (PS01189). Two
iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 12 sequences was identified. A single partial match was
also found, RS6X_SULSO, a member of the L7AE family of ribosomal proteins 
that matches motifs 2 and 3.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
