FUNGALYSIN
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship[1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1,2].

Fungalysin is a zinc-containing metallopeptidase that belongs to the M36 
family of clan MA [3]. It is produced by fungi (Apergillus and other
species) to aid degradation of host lung cell walls on infection. The
enzyme is a 42kDa single chain protein, with a pH optimum of 7.5-8.0 and
optimal temperature of 60 celcius [4].

FUNGALYSIN is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
fungalysin (M36) metallopeptidases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 8 includes
the region encoded by PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142), which
describes the HEXXH active site; and motif 9 contains the zinc-binging Glu,
and active site Tyr and Asp residues. A single iteration on OWL31.1 was 
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified
beyond the starting set. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences.
