ANTENNAPEDIA
Organisms develop according to a precise program that specifies the body
plan in intricate detail, and also determines the timing of developmental
events [1]. The highly complex nature of these events has suggested that 
the process may be regulated by proteins capable of controlling the 
temporal and spatial expression of many structural genes. The genes for 
this process were first discovered as homeotic mutations in Drosophila [2],
and many similar genes are now known in a wide variety of organisms.

Proteins that regulate developmental gene expression are nuclear proteins 
[3] that contain a conserved domain known as the homeobox, the flanking 
sequences of which differ considerably among different proteins. The homeo 
domain includes the helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif, which binds to DNA in a 
sequence-specific manner to exert a temporal and spatial regulation of 
developmental gene expression [4]. The second helix of this motif binds 
to DNA via a number of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions, which
occur between specific side chains and the exposed bases and thymine methyl
groups within the major groove. The first helix may help to stabilise the 
structure [5].

Many homeodomain-containing proteins have now been sequenced and, while
the homeodomain flanking regions vary, characteristic conserved sequences
upstream of the domain allow the proteins to be grouped into 3 subfamilies:
the so-called antennapedia, engrailed and 'paired box' proteins. Antenna-
pedia, which regulates the formation of leg structures in Drosophila, was 
one of the first homeotic genes studied and led to the discovery of the 
homeobox domain. Over expression of this gene in the wrong segment of the 
fruit fly can lead to the formation of leg structures in these segments. 
For example, over expression in the head segment can lead to the formation 
of legs instead of antennae (hence the name antennapedia). The sequences of
the antennapedia proteins contain a conserved hexapeptide 5-16 residues 
upstream of the homeobox, the specific function of which is unclear.

ANTENNAPEDIA is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
antennapedia-type homeobox proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 10 sequences: motif 1 encodes the conserved hexa-
peptide (cf. PROSITE pattern PS00032)). Five iterations on OWL20.0 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 79 
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 140 sequences.
