SH3DOMAIN
SH3 (src Homology-3) domains are small protein modules containing 
approximately 50 amino acid residues [1]. They are found in a variety of
of proteins with enzymatic activity: e.g., in csrc and PLCy1; adaptor
proteins Crk and Grb2, which lack catalytic sequences; and in cytoskeletal
proteins, such as fodrin and yeast actin binding protein ABP-1. Although
usually found as single copies, multiple (2-4) copies of the domain can be
present in a single polypeptide, particularly in the adaptor proteins. 

SH3 domains are commonly found in proteins that also contain SH2 (src 
Homology-2) domains, suggesting that their functions are inter-related.
The location of SH3 domains within the amino acid sequence varies widely,
and their specific functions are still unclear. The present view is that
they act as protein binding modules, and are involved in linking signals
transmitted from the cell surface by protein tyrosine kinases to 
"downstream effector proteins".

The crystal structure of the SH3 domain of the cytoskeletal protein
spectrin, and the solution structures of SH3 domains of phospholipase C
(PLC-y) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase p85 alpha-subunit, have been
determined [2-4]. In spite of relatively limited sequence similarity,
their overall structures are similar. The domains belong to the alpha+beta
structural class, with 5 to 8 beta-strands forming 2 tightly-packed, anti-
parallel beta-sheets arranged in a barrel-like structure, and intervening
loops sometimes forming helices. Conserved aliphatic and aromatic residues
form a hydrophobic core (A11, L23, A29, V34, W42, L52 and V59 in PLC-y [4])
and a hydrophobic pocket on the molecular surface (L12, F13, W53 and P55 in
PLC-y). The conserved core is believed to stabilise the fold, while the
pocket is thought to serve as a binding site for target proteins. Conserved
carboxylic amino acids located in the loops, on the periphery of the
pocket (D14 and E22), may be involved in protein-protein interactions via
proline-rich regions. The N- and C-termini are packed in close proximity,
indicating that they are independent structural modules.
                                                                      
SH3DOMAIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for SH3
domains. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 11
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
domain length - motifs 1 and 4 encode the N- and C-terminal beta-strands,
which contain the conserved residues of the hydrophobic pocket; motifs 2
and 3 span the central beta-strands containing the conserved residues
that constitute the hydrophobic core. Four iterations on OWL26.3 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 176
sequences was identified. Sixty-nine partial matches were also found
(the fingerprint does not perform perfectly because of the low level of
sequence similarity between SH3 domains, and is further complicated by
their multiple repeat nature).

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 257 sequences, and 145
partial matches.
