KINESINHEAVY
Kinesins are found in organisms from all the major eukaryotic kingdoms:
protists, fungi, plants and animals [1]. They are believed to function
as motors for microtubule-dependent motile phenomena, such as membrane
transport, and chromosome movement during mitosis and meiosis. The
common feature of kinesins is a highly-conserved 'motor domain' that
contains binding sites for ATP and microtubules. Linked to the motor
domains are 'tail domains' that vary somewhat in amino acid sequence.
It is believed that tail domains may specify the type of cargo that
particular kinesins are able to transport along microtubules.

Kinesins contain 2 heavy and 2 light chains. Maintenance of their
quaternary structure does not require interchain disulphide bonds.
Details of the structure have been revealed by high-resolution electron
microscopy [2], showing kinesin to be an asymmetric rod-like molecule
(~80nm long), with a pair of globular heads located at one end and a
fan-shaped tail at the other. Kinesin heavy chains are mildly acidic
polypeptides ranging from around 109 to 117 kDa. The sequences are highly 
similar, sharing more than 70% identity within their N-terminal motor 
domains. Downstream of the motor domain is an extended region that forms
an alpha-helical coiled coil. Beyond this is the C-terminal region,
which together with the light chains forms the tail domain, which
associate with membrane-bound organelles. 

KINESINHEAVY is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
kinesin heavy chains. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the well-conserved
motor domain, motif 3 spanning the decapeptide encoded by PROSITE pattern
KINESIN_MOTOR_DOMAIN (PS00411), which is involved in microtubule binding.
Three iterations on OWL25.2 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 48 sequences was identified. Five partial
matches were also found, all of which are kinesin heavy chain fragments
lacking the first 2 motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 120 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
