DNAPOLX
DNA	carries the biological information that instructs cells how to exist
in an ordered fashion: accurate replication is thus one of the most
important events in the cell life cycle. This function is mediated by
DNA-directed DNA-polymerases, which add nucleotide triphosphate (dNTP)
residues to the 5'-end of the growing DNA chain, using a complementary 
DNA as template. Small RNA molecules are generally used as primers for
chain elongation, although terminal proteins may also be used.

DNA-dependent DNA-polymerases have been grouped into families, denoted A, B
and X, on the basis of sequence similarities [1,2].	Members of family X
encompass two distinct polymerase enzymes that have similar functionality:
vertebrate polymerase beta (yeast pol 4), and terminal deoxynucleotidyl-
transferase (TdT) (EC 2.7.7.31). The former functions in DNA repair, while
the latter terminally adds single nucleotides to polydeoxynucleotide chains.
Both enzymes catalyse addition of nucleotides in a distributive manner, 
i.e. they dissociate after the addition of a single nucleotide.

Three motifs, A, B and C, as defined by Delarue et al. [2], are seen to be 
conserved across all DNA-polymerases, with motifs A and C also seen in RNA- 
polymerases. They are centered on invariant residues, and their structural 
significance was implied from the Klenlow (E.coli) structure: motif A 
contains a strictly-conserved aspartate at the junction of a beta-strand 
and an alpha-helix; motif B contains an alpha-helix with positive charges; 
and motif C has a doublet of negative charges, located in a beta-turn-beta 
secondary structure [2]. 

DNAPOLX is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for DNA-
polymerase family X. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length - motif 1 includes helix 7 and a number of conserved
residues involved in metal and DNA binding; motif 2 straddles strands
2 and 3, and helix 12; motif 3 includes "motif C", which contains two of
the active site Asps; motif 4 spans strand 7 and helix 14, and corresponds
to "motif A", which includes an active site Asp; motif 5 spans the
C-terminus of helix 15 and the N-terminus of helix 16, and includes a
conserved aromatic residue involved in ligand binding; and motif 6, which
lies at the C-terminus, spans helices 17 and 18. Two iterations on OWL30.1
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 16
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of
which are non-vertebrate polymerase X family homologues.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 13 sequences, and 6
partial matches.
