SSRCOGNITION
Human cDNA encoding a structure-specific recognition protein, SSRP1, has
been characterised [1]; the protein binds specifically to DNA modified with
the anti-cancer drug cisplatin. An 81kDa protein is predicted, containing
several highly-charged domains and a stretch of 75 residues that share 47%
identity with a portion of the high mobility group (HMG) protein HMG1 [1].
This HMG box probably constitutes the structure recognition element for 
cisplatin-modified DNA, the probable recognition motif being the local
duplex unwinding and bending that occurs on formation of intra-strand 
cross-links [1].

SSRP1 is the human homologue of a recently-identified mouse protein that
binds to recombination signal sequences [2]. These sequences have been
postulated to form stem-loop structures, further implicating local bends
and unwinding in DNA as a recognition target for HMG-box proteins.

A Drosophila melanogaster cDNA encoding an HMG-box-containing protein has
also been isolated [3,4]. This protein shares 50% sequence identity with
human SSRP1. In vitro binding studies using Drosophila SSRP showed that
the protein binds to single-stranded DNA and RNA, with highest affinity
for nucleotides G and U. 

Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequences among SSRP family members
reveals 48% identity, with structural conservation in the C-terminus of the
HMG box, as well as domains of highly charged residues [4]. The most highly
conserved regions lie in the poorly understood N-terminus, suggesting that
this portion of the protein is critical for its function [4].

SSRCOGNITION is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
structure-specific DNA recognition proteins. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved sections spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing
on those regions that characterise the structure recognition proteins but
distinguish them from the HMG-like family. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 12 
sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found: BTU84139
is a bovine SSRP protein fragment that lacks the portion of sequence 
bearing the first two motifs, and YMG9_YEAST is a yeast hypothetical
protein that makes strong matches with motifs 1,3,5,6 and 8.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 8 sequences, and 1
partial match.
