CAMPKINASE
Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is a key intracellular regulator of cell function in both
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. One of the ways in which it regulates enzymes
is by binding to and causing activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinases,
which in turn activate or deactivate other enzymes by phosphorylating them.

There are 2 types of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, designated I and II. 
Both perform the same function and have the same substrate, but type I is 
found predominantly in skeletal tissue, and type II in cardiac tissue. 
The enzyme is a dimer, each subunit of which contains both a regulatory 
domain and a catalytic domain connected by a hinge region. In type II 
enzymes, the hinge region can be autophosphorylated by interaction of the 
catalytic domain of one subunit and a region of the other subunit 
immediately preceding the cAMP binding domain, resulting in the 
inactivation of the enzyme [1]. Type I does not undergo such autophospho-
rylation, but it can be phosphorylated slowly in vitro by cGMP-dependent 
protein kinases [2].

cAMP-Dependent protein kinases are activated by the binding of 2 cAMP
molecules to specific areas at the C-terminus of each regulatory subunit of
the enzyme, which contains 2 repeats of a similar sequence. This causes 
in a conformational change in the structure, resulting in dissociation of
the active catalytic domain from the regulatory domains.

CAMPKINASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinases. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the second 
cAMP binding domain (after Jahnsen et al. [3]). Three iterations on
OWL11.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 19 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, including a fragment (NRL_2APK), and a subfamily of cGMP-dependent
protein kinases that match the first 3 motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 30 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
