PEPSIN
Crystallographic studies have shown that enzymes of the pepsin family exist
as monomeric bi-lobed molecules, in which the active site lies between the
two lobes [1,2]. The lobes are homologous, having arisen by gene
duplication of a single-lobed molecule, possibly similar to the single-
lobed retropepsin (A2) family [2]. In each of the lobes, the catalytic
aspartate is located in an Asp-Ser/Thr-Gly motif [3].

Cysteine residues are well conserved within the pepsin family, pepsin
itself containing 3 disulphide loops. The first loop is found in all but
the fungal enzymes, and is usually around five residues in length, but is
longer in barrierpepsin and candidapepsin; the second loop is also small
and found only in the animal enzymes; and the third loop is the largest,
found in all members of the family, except for the cysteine-free
polyporopepsin [3]. The loops are spread unequally throughout the two
lobes, suggesting that they formed after the initial gene duplication and
fusion event [3].

Most members of the pepsin family specifically cleave bonds in peptides
that are at least 6 residues in length, with hydrophobic residues in both
the P1 and P1' positions [3]. Crystallography has shown the active site to
form a groove across the junction of the two lobes, with an extended loop 
projecting over the cleft to form an 11-residue flap, which encloses
substrates and inhibitors within the active site [3]. Specificity is
determined by several hydrophobic residues surrounding the catalytic
asparagines, and by three residues in the flap [3].

PEPSIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the pepsin
(A1) family of aspartate proteases. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 23 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions within the central portion of the alignment - motif 1 contains the
catalytic residues of the first domain; motif 3 includes the region encoded
by PROSITE pattern ASP_PROTEASE (PS00141), which describes the active site
of the second catalytic domain. Five iterations on OWL29.3 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 145 sequences was
identified. Thirteen partial matches were also found: of these, CAASPPRO is
an aspartic protease from Candida albicans that lacks an appreciable match
with motif 2; the remaining 12 are fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 157 sequences, and 24
partial matches.
