BLYTICPTASE
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship[1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1,2].

B-lytic endopeptidases are bacterial metallopeptidases that belong to the 
M23 protease family [1,3]. Cleavage is specific for glycine bonds,
especially in -Gly-Gly+Xaa sequences (Xaa is any aliphatic hydrophobic
residue). They lyse the cell walls of Gram-positive bacteria in which the
peptidoglycan cross-links contain glycine residues. The enzymes contain
zinc, but the exact position of the metal-binding ligands is uncertain. On
the basis of similarity with D-Ala-D-Ala-carboxypeptidase, it has been
suggested that a conserved His-X-His motif (where X is any amino acid)
forms part of the binding site [1].

The protein sequence deduced from the nucleotide sequence reveals a mature
enzyme of 179 residues [4]. In the gene product from Achromobacter lyticus,
an additional 195 amino acids at the N-terminal end of the protein include
the signal peptide, indicating that the enzyme is synthesised as a 
precursor [4]. 

BLYTICPTASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for B-lytic
metalloendopeptidases (M23). The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full length of the protease domain - motif 4 encodes
the putative di-histidine zinc binding site. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 
sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
