UBIQUITIN
Ubiquitin, a small 76-residue protein present in all eukaryotic cells [1],
is highly conserved in nature, species as diverse as humans and insects
having identical sequences [1]. Ubiquitin is required for ATP-dependent
non-lysosomal intracellular protein degradation [1], sensitizing proteins
to attack by intracellular proteases [2]. The reaction involves covalent
bonding of ubiquitin to the protein to be degraded or 'labelled', the bond
forming between the C-terminal Gly of ubiquitin (which extends from the
globular body of the peptide) and Lys side-chains of the target protein
[1]. Proteins degraded in such a manner include most defective intra-
cellular proteins and normal proteins with a rapid turnover rate. 

The most abundant form of ubiquitin is the histone 2A (H2A)-ubiquitin
conjugate found in the nucleus. The conjugate is usually found in actively
transcribed chromosomal regions, suggesting a possible role in either DNA
repair or gene expression [1,3]. All organisms possess a poly-ubiquitin
gene, with various numbers of tandem repeats (ranging from 3 in
Dictyostelium discoideum to 15 in Drosophila melanogaster): the polyprotein
is proteolytically cleaved to produce free ubiquitin [3]. Although mostly
present in the cytoplasm, the protein has also been found on the cell
surface, associated with various receptors, such as lymphocyte homing
receptor and platelet derived growth factor receptor [4]. 

UBIQUITIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for ubiquitin
and ubiquitin-like proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs span virtually the full alignment
length, motif 3 including most of the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
UBIQUITIN (PS00299), which contains the conserved C-terminal heptapeptide.
Two iterations on OWL22.1 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 105 sequences was identified. Five partial
matches were also found, all of which are ubiquitin-like proteins.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 101 sequences, and 16
partial matches.
