ANIONEXCHNGR
Anion exchange proteins are thought to participate in pH and cell volume
regulation. They are glycosylated, plasma-membrane transport proteins that
exchange hydrogen carbonate (HCO3-) for chloride (Cl-) in a reversible,
electroneutral manner [1,2]. To date, three anion exchanger isoforms have
been identified (AE1-3), AE1 being the previously-characterised erythrocyte
band 3 protein. They share a predicted topology of 12-14 transmembrane (TM)
domains, but have differing distribution patterns and cellular
localisation. The best characterised isoform, AE1, is known to be the most
abundant membrane protein in mature erythrocytes. It has a molecular mass
of ~95kDa and consists of two major domains. The N-terminal 390 residues
form a water-soluble, highly elongated domain that serves as an attachment
site for the binding of the membrane skeleton and other cytoplasmic
proteins. The remainder of the protein is a 55kDa hydrophobic domain that
is responsible for catalysing anion exchange. The function of the analogous
domains of AE2 and AE3 remains to be determined [3].

Naturally-occuring mutations have been characterised in the AE1 gene, which
give rise to forms of several human diseases: included are spherocytosis,
affecting red blood cells, and familial distal renal tubular acidosis, a
kidney disease associated with the formation of kidney stones [4].

ANIONEXCHNGR is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
anion exchanger family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of ten sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the end of
the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus, and the start of the first TM domain;
motif 2 lies between TM domains eight and nine; motif 3 encodes the start
of the ninth TM domain; motif 4 lies between the ninth and tenth TM
domains; motif 5 encodes the start of the tenth TM domain; motif 6 lies
between the eleventh and twelfth TM domains; and motifs 7-13 reside at the 
C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 18 sequences was
identified.
