S21N4MTFRASE
In prokaryotes, the major role of DNA methylation is to protect host
DNA against degradation by restriction enzymes. There are 2 major classes
of DNA methyltransferase that differ in the nature of the modifications
they effect [1]. The members of one class (C-MTases) methylate a ring
carbon and form C5-methylcytosine (see PRINTS signature C5METTRFRASE).
Members of the second class (N-MTases) methylate exocyclic nitrogens and
form either N4-methylcytosine (N4-MTases) or N6-methyladenine (N6-MTases).
Both classes of MTase utilise the cofactor S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM)
as the methyl donor and are active as monomeric enzymes [1].

The structure of N6-MTase TaqI (M.TaqI) has been resolved to 2.4A [2].
The molecule folds into 2 domains: an N-terminal catalytic domain, which
contains the catalytic and cofactor binding sites, and comprises a central
9-stranded beta-sheet, surrounded by 5 helices; and a C-terminal DNA
recognition domain, which is formed by 4 small beta-sheets and 8 alpha-
helices. The N- and C-terminal domains form a cleft that accommodates the
DNA substrate.

A classification of N-MTases has been proposed, based on conserved motif
(CM) arrangements [3]. According to this classification, N4-MTases that
have an SPPY motif (CM II) occuring before the FxGxG motif (CM I) are
designated S21 class N4-adenine MTases.

S21N4MTFRASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
S21 class N4-adenine MTases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences. The motifs were drawn from the conserved
regions used by Timinskas et al. [3] in their DNA MTase classification:
the motifs correspond to CM II, III, Is and I, respectively - motif 1,
which contains the N-MTase-specific tetrapeptide SPPY (cf. PROSITE pattern
N4_MTASE), is important for methylation; and motif 4, which contains the
pattern FxGxG, forms part of the cofactor (SAM) binding site [4]. Two
iterations on OWL27.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 8 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found, all of which are N6-adenine MTases or their homologues.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 40 sequences, and 22
partial matches.
