CYTCHROMECIC
Cytochromes c (cyt c) can be defined as electron-transfer proteins having
one or several haem c groups, bound to the protein by one or, more
generally, two thioether bonds involving sulphydryl groups of cysteine
residues. The fifth haem iron ligand is always provided by a histidine
residue. Cyt c possess a wide range of properties and function in a large
number of different redox processes [1].

Ambler [2] recognised four classes of cyt c. Class I includes the low-spin
soluble cyt c of mitochondria and bacteria, with the haem-attachment site
towards the N-terminus, and the sixth ligand provided by a methionine
residue about 40 residues further on towards the C-terminus. On the basis
of sequence similarity, class I cyt c were further subdivided into five 
classes, IA to IE. Class IC, "split-alpha-band" cyt c, possess a widened
or split alpha-band of lowered absorptivity. This class includes dihaem
cyt c4 and monohaem cyt c6 (cyt c-553) and cyt c-554. 

The 3D structures of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii cyt c6 [3] and Desulfovibrio 
vulgaris cyt c-553 [4] have been determined. The proteins consist of 4 
alpha-helices; three "core" helices form a "basket" around the haem group, 
with one haem edge exposed to the solvent.  

CYTCHROMECIC is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
class IC cyt c. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 17
sequences: motif 1 is situated in the loop between helices 1 and 2, and 
includes two invariant Cys residues, which covalently bind the haem group,
and a His residue, which provides the fifth haem iron ligand (cf. PROSITE 
pattern CYTOCHROME_C); and motif 2 includes both an invariant Met, which
provides the sixth haem iron ligand, and the N-terminal part of helix 4,
which contains a conserved aromatic residue. Two iterations on OWL28.0 were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 41
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 50 sequences.
