GPOSANCHOR
Viruses, parasites and bacteria are covered in protein and sugar molecules
that help them gain entry into a host by counteracting the host's defenses
[1]. One such molecule is the M protein produced by certain streptococcal
bacteria. M proteins embody a motif that is now known to be shared by many 
bacterial surface proteins. The motif includes a conserved hexapeptide,
which precedes a hydrophobic C-terminal membrane anchor, which itself
precedes a cluster of basic residues [2,3]. The hexapeptide is suggested
to be essential for the correct anchoring to the bacterial membrane - the
hydrophobic domain alone, with its C-terminal charged residues, is
insufficient for attachment. The proteins that contain the conserved
hexapeptide and hydrophobic anchor are diverse: they include M proteins,
IgA and IgG binding proteins, fibronectin-binding proteins, wall-associated
proteins, trypsin-resistant surface T protein, protein H precursor, etc..

GPOSANCHOR is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
membrane anchor region of such cell-surface proteins. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: motif 1 includes the well-
conserved hexapeptide encoded by PROSITE pattern GRAM_POS_ANCHORING
(PS00343), and motif 2 spans the hydrophobic C-terminal anchor and part
of the basic residue cluster. Three iterations on OWL21.1 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 40 sequences was
identified. The diagnostic performance of this fingerprint is not high,
largely because it contains only 2 motifs, coupled with the fact that the
degree of sequence similarity within the family is poor. As a result, 
it has been necessary to use large hitlists to capture as many true-
positives as possible. Note also that the fingerprint encodes both the
conserved hexapeptide and the hydrophobic transmembrane motif, and hence
sequences only bearing the hexapeptide are not identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 58 sequences.
