TOGAVIRIN
Proteolytic enzymes that use serine in their catalytic machinery are 
widespread and numerous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes
[1]. They encompass a range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase,
endopeptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase. More than 20 serine
protease families (denoted S1 - S27) have been identified, which have been
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
and functional similarities [1]. Structures are known for four of the clans
(SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be unrelated, suggesting at least four
evolutionary origins of serine peptidase, and possibly many more [1].

There are similarities in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases
from different evolutionary origins. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin and
carboxypeptidase C clans exploit a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate
and histidine, in which serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangement of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example, in the chymotrypsin clan
(SA), the catalytic triad is ordered HDS, whereas it is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB), and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

Togavirin, also known as sindbis virus core endopeptidase, is a serine 
protease resident at the N-terminus of the p130 polyprotein of togaviruses
[1]. The polyprotein also includes structural proteins for the nucleocapsid
core and for the glycoprotein spikes [1]. Togavirin is only active while
part of the polyprotein, cleavage at a Trp-Ser bond resulting in total lack
of activity [1]. Mutagenesis studies have identified the location of the
His-Asp-Ser catalytic triad, and X-ray studies have revealed the protein
fold to be similar to that of chymotrypsin [1,3].

TOGAVIRIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
togavirin (sindbis virus core endopeptidase) (S3) family of serine
proteases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full length of the protease - motifs 2, 3 and 5 contain the catalytic
His, Asp and Ser residues respectively. Two iterations on OWL29.3 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 41
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 48 sequences.
