HSVCAPSIDP40
Proteases can be grouped into 4 classes according to the prominent
functional groups at the active sites: viz., the Ser, Asp, Cys and
metalloproteases. 3D structures are known for examples from all these
classes: e.g., trypsin (Ser), pepsin (Asp), papain (Cys), and 
carboxypeptidase (Zn).

A number of viral proteases have been discovered and attempts have been
made to assign them to one or other of the above classes, but the extent
of the sequence similarity is very low. In a few cases, X-ray studies have
confirmed the assignment; e.g., sindbis core protein seems to belong to a
third class of the trypsin-like Ser proteases [5,6]. [nb. There are 2 
types of Ser protease: the trypsin-like and subtilisin-like, which have 
an identical spatial arrangement of catalytic His, Asp and Ser but in quite
different protein scaffolds (an example of convergent evolution). The 
family of trypsin-like Ser proteases has been subdivided into 2 classes: 
the "large" class (ca 230 residues) includes mostly mammalian enzymes (e.g.
chymotrypsin, trypsin, elastase, kallikrein, thrombin) and the "small" 
class (ca 190 residues) includes the bacterial enzymes (e.g., alpha-lytic 
protease, S.griseus proteases A and B, S.griseus trypsin, S.aureus
protease)].

Retrovirus proteases, such as HIV protease, are Asp proteases [7,8].
There seems to be fairly good evidence that the Cys-active-centre viral
proteases are in fact trypsin-like Ser proteases in which the active
site Ser has been replaced by Cys [9,10]. The 2a and 3c subclasses of the 
viral Cys proteases are homologous with the small and large subclasses, 
respectively, of the trypsin-like Ser proteases. All the animal and plant
viral Cys proteases have in common a +ve strand RNA genome that is 
translated into a large polyprotein.

Herpesviridae are large ds DNA viruses. The capsid of herpes simplex virus
type 1 is composed of 7 proteins: VP5, VP19c, VP21, VP22a, VP23, VP24 and 
VP26. The region of the genome encoding VP22a is transcribed into 2 mRNAs
which have identical 3' ends but different 5' ends. The smaller mRNA is
specified by gene UL26.5 and encodes a 329 residue protein. The larger mRNA
is transcribed from gene UL26 and encodes a 635 residue protein whose
C-terminal region is identical to the 329 residue protein. The promoter
of the UL26.5 ORF is embedded in the 5'-terminal domain of the UL26 ORF.

The UL26 protein can proteolytically cleave itself and the UL26.5 protein
at a position 25 residues from the C-terminus. This proteolysis is
essential for capsid maturation. Capsid protein VP22a would correspond to
the UL26.5 protein cleaved 25 residues from its C-terminus, i.e. a 304
residue protein. The product of UL26.5 ORF is devoid of enzyme activity so
that the protease domain would map to the amino-proximal domain of the
UL26 ORF.

Genes corresponding to UL26 have been sequenced for a number of
Herpesviruses in addition to herpes simplex virus 1, including human
cytomegalovirus (UL80), simian cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus,
infectious laryngotracheitis virus, varicella voster virus (ORF33), equine
herpes virus and herpes virus saimiri. The amino terminus is the most
conserved of the UL26 protein.

There is a consensus sequence VXAS (where X is a polar residue) at the C-
terminal cleavage site. A similar consensus Y(V/L)XAS exists towards the C-
terminus of the putative protease domain (Ala247 - Ser248 in herpes 
simplex) and it has been proposed that the protease also acts at this 
site to produce capsid proteins VP24 (residues 1-247) and VP21 (248-610).

The exact extent of the protease domain remains unclear. There is some
evidence to suggest that residues 1 to 306 are necessary in herpes simplex
virus 1, but only 1 to 249 seem to be necessary in simian cytomegalovirus.
Studies with protease inhibitors suggest that the herpesvirus protease is
a Ser protease belonging to either the trypsin-like or subtilisin-like
families; it is not inhibited by inhibitors of Cys, Asp or metallo
proteases. The Ser proteases have His, Asp, and Ser in their active
sites. In an alignment of the first 300 residues of the putative protease
there are well-conserved regions containing His or Ser, but it is a little
more difficult to find a conserved Asp or Glu. Mutagenesis studies have so
far shown that out of Asp31, Ser32, Asp34, His61, His148 and Ser215, the
only residues whose substitution abolished enzyme activity were His61 and 
His148.

HSVCAPSIDP40 is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a general signature 
for the herpesvirus maturational proteases. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the full alignment length. A single iteration 
on OWL20.0 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set. A more subtle fingerprint would be
needed to pinpoint related proteases.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences, and 21
partial matches.
