CXCCHMKINER4
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Several 7TM receptors have been cloned but their endogenous ligands are
unknown; these have been termed orphan receptors. LCR1 was isolated from
a locus coeruleus library and its mRNA is also present in cerebellum, pons,
dorsal raphe, thalamus and substantia nigra [6,7]. It was originally thought
to encode a neuropeptide Y receptor (NPY3-R) [7], but this has been shown to
be incorrect [8], and it is now thought to be a type 4 C-X-C chemokine 
receptor.

CXCCHMKINER4 is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the type 4 C-X-C chemokine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
sections within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on 
those areas of the alignment that characterise the type 4 C-X-C chemokine 
receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like super-
family - motifs 1 and 2 span the N-terminus, motif 2 leading into the 
N-terminal portion of TM domain 1; motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic 
loop; motif 4 spans the first external loop; motif 5 lies in the second 
cytoplasmic loop; motif 6 lies in the second external loop; motif 7 spans
the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 8 spans the third external loop; and 
motif 9 resides at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL29.0 was 
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set. Several partial matches were also found: OAU38942 and 
MMLCR11 are N-terminal fragments lacking the last 3 and the last 4 motifs 
respectively; and the remaining matches are closely related members of the
rhodopsin superfamily, largely belonging to the chemokine and interleukin-8
receptor families.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 12 sequences, and 19
partial matches.
