SOMATOSTTN1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Somatostatin is a neurotransmitter/hormone with a wide range of biologial
functions [6]. It has an important role in the neuroendocrine system and
inhibits secretion of growth hormone and prolactin in the anterior
pituitary. It also inhibits secretion in the intestine (including gastric
acid in the stomach), pancreatic acinar cells and pancreatic beta-cells,
stimulates absorption in the intestine, and modulates smooth muscle 
contractility. In the CNS, it is a neurotransmitter activating a hyper-
polarising K+ current and inhibiting Ca2+ influx, and is believed to
play important roles in regulating locomotor activity and cognitive
function. Receptor subtypes were originally proposed on the basis of
functional and radio-ligand binding studies, and cloning has now confirmed
the presence of at least 4 subtypes.

High levels of mRNA for human SS1 receptors have been found in the jejunum
and stomach, with lower levels in the pancreas, colon and kidney - mRNA is 
absent in the brain [6]. Conversely, in rodent tissue, high levels of mRNA
are found in the brain, but are absent in peripheral tissues [6]. The
binding of agonists to recombinant receptor expressed in CHO cells is not
regulated by GTP and is unaffected by pertussis toxin [6].  

SOMATOSTTN1R is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type 1 somatostatin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the type 1 somatostatin receptors
but distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily -
motifs 1 and 2 lie at the N-terminus; motifs 3 and 4 span the second and
third external loops res.; and motifs 5 and 6 lie at the C-terminus. A
single iteration on OWL28.1 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences.
