CATPATPASEA
Proteins that transport heavy metals in micro-organisms and mammals share
similarities in their sequences and structures. These proteins provide an
important focus for research, some being involved in bacterial resistance
to toxic metals, such as lead and cadmium, while others are involved in
inherited human syndromes, such as Wilson and Menkes diseases [1].

A conserved 30-residue domain has been found in a number of these heavy
metal transport or detoxification proteins [1]. The domain, which has been
termed Heavy-Metal-Associated (HMA), contains two conserved cysteines that
are probably involved in metal binding. 

The HMA domain has been identified in the N-terminal regions of a variety
of cation-transporting ATPases (E1-E2 ATPases): the human copper ATPases 
involved in Wilson and Menkes diseases (ATP7A and ATP7B) each contain 6 
tandem copies; a chromosomal Staphylococcus aureus cadA contains two copies;
and the copper ATPases CCC2 from budding yeast, copA from Enterococcus 
faecalis, synA from Synechococcus, and cadmium ATPases cadA from Bacillus 
firmus and plasmid pI258 from Staphylococcus aureus contain a single copy.
Other ATPases that contain the HMA domain include: fixI from Rhizobium 
meliloti; pacS from Synechococcus strain PCC 7942; Mycobacterium leprae 
ctpA and ctpB; and Escherichia coli hypothetical protein yhhO. In addition,
the domain has been found in bacterial mercuric reductase; the copP copper-
binding protein of Helicobacter pylori; and in bacterial mercuric transport
proteins.

The structure of the mercuric ion-binding protein MerP from Shigella
flexneri has been determined. The fold has been classed as a ferredoxin-like
alpha-beta sandwich, having a beta-alpha beta-beta alpha-beta architecture,
with the two alpha-helices overlaying a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-
sheet [2]. Structural differences between the reduced and mercury-bound 
forms of merP are localised to the metal-binding loop containing the 
consensus sequence GMTCXXC, the two cysteines of which are involved in
bi-coordination of Hg(2+) [2].

Cation-transporting P-type ATPase from Mycobacterium leprae is an integral
membrane protein, with 12 predicted transmembrane (TM) domains. The protein,
which contains a single copy of the HMA domain, catalyses the reaction:

            ATP + H(2)O = ADP + orthophosphate

CATPATPASEA is an 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cation-transporting P-type ATPases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions in the N-terminal third of the alignment - motifs 1 and 2 lie partially
within TM domain 1; motif 3 encodes part of TM domain 4; and motif 4 resides 
between TM domains 4 and 5. Two iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 18 sequences was identified.
A single partial match was also found, Q70K41_9ACTO, a translated nucleotide
sequence from Gordonia westfalica that fails to match motif 4.
