CHERMTFRASE
Flagellated bacteria swim towards favourable chemicals and away from
deleterious ones. Sensing of chemoeffector gradients involves chemotaxis
receptors, transmembrane (TM) proteins that detect stimuli through their 
periplasmic domains and transduce the signals via their cytoplasmic domains 
[1,2]. Signalling outputs from these receptors are influenced both by the
binding of the chemoeffector ligand to their periplasmic domains and by 
methylation of specific glutamate residues on their cytoplasmic domains.
Methylation is catalysed by CheR, an S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyl-
transferase [2], which reversibly methylates specific glutamate residues
within a coiled coil region, to form gamma-glutamyl methyl ester residues
[2,3]: 

 S-Adenosyl-L-Methionine	       S-Adenosyl-L-Homocysteine
	  +		       =		  +
   Protein L-Glutamate		    Protein L-Glutamate Methyl Ester

The structure of the S.typhimurium chemotaxis receptor methyltransferase
CheR, bound to S-adenosylhomocysteine, has been determined to a resolution
of 2.0A [2]. The structure reveals CheR to be a two-domain protein, with a 
smaller N-terminal helical domain linked via a single polypeptide connection
to a larger C-terminal alpha/beta domain [2]. The C-terminal domain has the
characteristics of a nucleotide-binding fold, with an insertion of a small
anti-parallel beta-sheet subdomain [2]. The S-adenosylhomocysteine-binding 
site is formed mainly by the large domain, with contributions from residues
within the N-terminal domain and the linker region [2]. 

CHERMTFRASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cheR glutamate methyltransferase family. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions spanning the full alignment length. Two iterations on
OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 13 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are fragments or homologues that fail to match one or
more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 20 sequences, and 8
partial matches.
