GLHYDRLASE15
O-Glycosyl hydrolases (EC 3.2.1.-) are a widespread group of enzymes that
hydrolyse the glycosidic bond between two or more carbohydrates, or between
a carbohydrate and a non-carbohydrate moiety. A classification system for
glycosyl hydrolases, based on sequence similarity, has led to the definition
of up to 60 different families [1-4] (http://expasy.hcuge.ch/cgi-bin/lists?
glycosid.txt).

Family 15 encompasses the glucoamylases (GA). GA catalyses the release of
D-glucose from the non-reducing ends of starch and other oligo- or poly-
saccharides. Studies of fungal GA have indicated 3 closely-clustered acidic
residues that play a role in the catalytic mechanism [5]. This region is 
also conserved in a recently sequenced bacterial GA [6].

The 3D structure of the pseudo-tetrasaccharide acarbose complexed with
glucoamylase II(471) from Aspergillus awamori var. X100 has been determined
to 2.4A resolution [7]. The protein belongs to the mainly-alpha class, and
contains 19 helices and 9 strands.

GLHYDRLASE15 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
family 15 glycosyl hydrolases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions 
spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment - motif 2 includes part of 
helix 5 and the second beta-strand; motif 3 encompasses most of helix 6;
motif 4 spans strands 3 and 4, and includes the region encoded by PROSITE
pattern GLUCOAMYLASE (PS00820), which contains the catalytic cluster of
acidic residues; motif 5 includes part of helix 13; motif 6 spans the C-
terminus of helix 17 and strand 8; and motif 7 spans helix 18. Two
iterations on OWL29.3 was required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 18 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found, all of which are related sequences that fail to make
significant matches with one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
