ACHEINSECT
Acetylcholine is involved in the transfer of messages across a variety of
synapses in vertebrates and invertebrates. The diverse physiological effects
attributable to this molecule arise from the presence of specific receptors
in the postsynaptic cell membranes. Several classes of receptor are known, 
most of which translate the binding of acetylcholine into the opening of 
channels for the passage of ions, such as sodium and potassium.

Acetylcholinesterase is an enzyme that catalyses the hydrolysis of 
acetylcholine to choline and acetate:

     Acetylcholine + H(2)O -> Choline + Acetate 	     

The enzyme also acts on a variety of acetic esters and catalyses trans-
acetylations. It is found in, or attached to, cellular or basement membranes
of presynaptic cholinergic neurons and postsynaptic cholinoceptive cells.
To prevent continuous firing of nerve impulses, acetylcholinesterase has a
high K(cat) (~14000/s), to ensure that acetylcholine is broken down quickly.

Cholinesterases constitute a family of enzymes that fall into two main
types, depending on their substrate specificity: enzymes that preferentially
hydrolyse acetyl esters are termed acetylcholinesterase (AChE) (EC 3.1.1.7); 
those that prefer other types of ester, such as butyrylcholine are termed 
butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) (EC 3.1.1.8). 

Due to the importance of this enzyme, it is often targeted by insecticides,
and is especially relevant in efforts to eradicate mosquitos from certain
areas of the world [4,5].

ACHEINSECT is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for insect
acetylcholinesterases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved sections spanning
the N-terminal portion of the alignment. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of
which are Drosophila AChE fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences, and 1
partial match.
