CALCITONINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that   
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-   
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the   
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct   
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,   
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in   
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like   
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating   
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.       

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid   
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-   
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM'
signature.      

The major physiological role of calcitonin is to inhibit bone resorption
thereby leading to a reduction in plasma Ca++ [6]. Further, it enhances 
excretion of ions in the kidney, prevents absorption of ions in the 
intestine, and inhibits secretion in endocrine cells (e.g. pancreas and
pituitary). In the CNS, calcitonin has been reported to be analgesic
and to suppress feeding and gastric acid secretion. It is used to treat
Paget's disease of the bone. Calcitonin receptors are found predominantly
on osteoclasts or on immortal cell lines derived from these cells. It is
found in lower amounts in the brain (e.g. in hypothalamus and pituitary
tissues) and in peripheral tissues (e.g. testes, kidney, liver and
lymphocytes). It has also been described in lung and breast cancer cell
lines. The predominant signalling pathway is activation of adenylyl cyclase
through Gs, but calcitonin has also been described to have both stimulatory
and inhibitory actions on the phosphoinositide pathway.

CALCITONINR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
calcitonin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the calcitonin receptors but distinguish them from the rest
of the secretin-like family - motifs 1-3 were drawn from the N-terminal
region leading into the first TM domain; motif 4 lies at the C-terminus of
the second TM domain following into the loop region; motif 5 is N-terminal
to the seventh TM region; and motif 6 was drawn from the C-terminus. Two
iterations on OWL25.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 9 sequences was identified. A single partial match was
also found, RNCLR, a new calcitonin-like receptor from rat pulmonary blood
vessels [7].

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
