CUEXPORT
Proteins that transport heavy metals in micro-organisms and mammals share
similarities in their sequences and structures. These proteins provide an
important focus for research, some being involved in bacterial resistance
to toxic metals, such as lead and cadmium, while others are involved in
inherited human syndromes, such as Wilson and Menkes diseases [1].

A conserved 30-residue domain has been found in a number of these heavy
metal transport or detoxification proteins [1]. The domain, which has been
termed Heavy-Metal-Associated (HMA), contains two conserved cysteines that
are probably involved in metal binding. 

The HMA domain has been identified in the N-terminal regions of a variety
of cation transporting ATPases, and in other ATPases such as fixI from 
Rhizobium meliloti; pacS from Synechococcus strain PCC 7942; Mycobacterium 
leprae ctpA and ctpB; and Escherichia coli hypothetical protein yhhO. In
addition, the domain has been found in bacterial mercuric reductase; the
copP copper-binding protein of Helicobacter pylori; and in bacterial
mercuric transport proteins.

The structure of the mercuric ion-binding protein MerP from Shigella
flexneri has been determined. The fold has been classed as a ferredoxin-like
alpha-beta sandwich, having a beta-alpha beta-beta alpha-beta architecture,
with the two alpha-helices overlaying a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-
sheet [2]. Structural differences between the reduced and mercury-bound 
forms of merP are localised to the metal-binding loop containing the 
consensus sequence GMTCXXC, the two cysteines of which are involved in
bi-coordination of Hg(2+) [2].

CUEXPORT is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for copper
ion binding proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
the full alignment length - motif 1 spans strand 1 and the first metal-
binding cysteine; motif 2 spans the second metal-binding cysteine and helix
1; motif 3 includes the second strand; motif 4 includes strand 3; and motif
5 encodes helix 2. A single iteration on OWL30.2 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
A single partial match was found, HFAJ19324, a cop-associated protein from
Helicobacter felis that fails to make a significant match with motif 1.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences, and 1
partial match.
