HTHREPRESSR
Helix-turn-helix (HTH) motifs are found in all known DNA binding proteins
that regulate gene expression. The motif consists of approximately 20 
residues and is characterised by 2 alpha-helices, which make intimate 
contacts with the DNA and are joined by a short turn. The second helix of 
the HTH motif binds to DNA via a number of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic 
interactions, which occur between specific side chains and the exposed 
bases and thymine methyl groups within the major groove of the DNA [1]. The
first helix helps to stabilise the structure [2]. 

The HTH motif is very similar in sequence and structure to the N-terminal 
region of the lamda [3] and other repressor proteins, and has also been 
identified in many other DNA-binding proteins on the basis of sequence and 
structural similarity [1]. One of the principal differences between HTH 
motifs in these different proteins arises from the stereochemical 
requirement for glycine in the turn, which is needed to avoid steric 
interference of the beta-carbon with the main chain: for cro and other 
repressors the Gly appears to be mandatory, while for many of the homeotic
and other DNA-binding proteins the requirement is relaxed. 

HTHREPRESSR is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the HTH
motif of lambda and other repressors, and various homeotic proteins. The
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 20 sequences (after
Brennan and Matthews [1]): the motifs span the complete motif and hinge on
the conserved glycine, differing from the equivalent cro motifs in terms of
the number and distribution of charged and aromatic residues. Four
iterations on OWL19.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 102 sequences was identified. This set includes
repressor proteins, an atypical cro sequence, RNA polymerase sigma factors,
homeotic proteins, etc., all of which have Gly conserved in the turn. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 103 sequences.
