SOMATOTROPIN
Somatotropin, a protein of 191 amino acids, is a hormone that plays an
important role in growth control. It belongs to an evolutionarily related
family that includes choriomammotropin (lactogen), its placental analogue;
prolactin, which promotes lactation in the mammary gland, and placental
prolactin-related proteins; proliferin and proliferin related protein; and
somatolactin from various fish [1-4].

The 3D structure of bovine somatotropin has been predicted using a 
combination of heuristics and energy minimisation [5]. The model is a
four-helix bundle, in which the helices are intimately packed to form an
assembly with approximately square cross-section [5]. Adjacent helices are
anti-parallel, with a tilt between them such that the assembly has the
appearance of a left-handed twisted bundle [5]. There are two disulphide
bonds within the structure, as shown schematically below: one "hooks" the
middle of a long loop with helix 4, pulling the loop onto the surface of 
the bundle; the other "hooks" the C-terminal segment with the same helix,
forcing the C-terminus to bend towards the bundle [5]. Consequently, a 
considerable part of the bundle surface is closely packed, or intimately
embraced, by the loop segments [5]. 
                                              
       xxxxxxxxxxxxxCxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxCxxxCxxC
                    |                            |   |  |
                    +----------------------------+   +--+

SOMATOTROPIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
somatotropin, prolactin and related hormones. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 12 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
short conserved regions spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment -
motif 1 spans helix 2, and includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
SOMATOTROPIN_1 (PS00266), which contains one of the Cys residues involved
in intramolecular disulphide bond formation; motif 2 spans helix 2, leading
into helix 3; motifs 3 and 4 span helix 6, and include the region encoded by
PROSITE pattern SOMATOTROPIN_2 (PS00338), which contains two other conserved 
Cys residues. Three iterations on OWL30.0 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 172 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are related sequences and
fragments that fail to match one or two motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 160 sequences, and 22
partial matches.
