P67PHOX
Phagocytes form the first line of defence against invasion by micro-
organisms. Engulfing of bacteria by neutrophils is accompanied by the
consumption of large amounts of oxygen - a so-called respiratory burst.
Defects in phagocytosis involving the lack of a respiratory burst give
rise to chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), in which patients are pre-
disposed to infection, often from otherwise non-pathogenic bacteria [1].

Regulation of the respiratory burst takes place at the phagocytic vacuole.
The process is mediated by NADPH oxidase, which transports electrons across
the plasma membrane to form superoxide (an oxygen molecule with an extra
electron that is toxic to normal cells) in the vacuole interior. The
electrons are carried across the membrane by a short electron transport
chain in the form of an unusual flavocytochrome b [1].

To conserve NADPH and avoid the toxic effects of superoxide, the oxidase 
remains inactive until it receives an appropriate stimulus. Activation
involves the participation of a number of cytosolic proteins, some of 
which attach to the flavocytochrome. P47phox, p67phox and p40phox are
specialised components of phagocytic cells, all of which contain SH3
domains, by means of which they attach to proline-rich regions of other
proteins. Upon activation, p47phox and p67phox are phosphorylated and,
with p40phox, translocate to the region of the plasma membrane forming
the phagocytic vacuole, where they associates with hydrophilic regions
of the flavocytochrome [1].

P67PHOX is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for neutrophil
cytosol factor 2 (p67phox). The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length, motifs 2 and 3 and 4-6 spanning
the two SH3 domains. A single iteration on OWL27.0 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Several partial matches were also found, all of which match motifs 4-6 and
are known to contain SH3 domains.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
