PHEHYDRXLASE
Flavoprotein pyridine nucleotide cytochrome reductases [1] (FPNCR) catalyse
the interchange of reducing equivalents between one-electron carriers and
the two-electron-carrying nicotinamide dinucleotides. The enzymes include
ferredoxin:NADP+ reductases (FNR); plant and fungal NAD(P)H:nitrate
reductases; NADH:cytochrome b5 reductases; NADPH:P450 reductases;
NADPH:sulfite reductases; nitric oxide synthases; phthalate dioxygenase 
reductase; and various other flavoproteins.

Dioxygen can be incorporated directly into organic compounds in reactions
catalysed by enzymes termed oxygenases or hydroxylases: oxygenases that
catalyse the incorporation of both atoms of dioxygen into substrates are
known as dioxygenases; those that catalyse the incorporation of only one
atom of dioxygen are termed monooxygenases, or mixed-function oxygenases.
The second atom of dioxygen is reduced to H2O either by the substrates
themselves or by a co-substrate reductant [2].

Electron transfer components of a number of bacterial multi-component 
aromatic-ring and alkyl-group oxygenases (including phenol hydroxylase [3],
benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase [4], toluate 1,2-dioxygenase [5], xylene 
monooxygenase [6] and methane monooxygenase [7]), belong to family of 
[2Fe-2S] ferredoxin/FPNCR fusion proteins. Other members of the family are 
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis CDP-6-deoxy-3,4-glucoseen reductase [8] and 
S.typhimurium rfbI protein [9]. All contain a [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin domain
fused to the N-terminus of an FPNCR domain. The direction of electron flow
is from flavin to the [2Fe-2S] center. 

PHEHYDRXLASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
phenol hydroxylase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn solely from the FPNCR
domain - motifs 1-3 span the flavin-binding domain, and motifs 4-6 encode
the NAD(H)-binding domain. Motifs 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 correspond to FPNCR
motifs 1, 2, 4, 5 and 8, respectively. Motif 2 appears to be involved in
binding the isoalloxazine ring of FAD; motif 4 includes residues involved
in binding the diphosphate group of the pyridine nucleotide; and motif 6
contains a conserved Cys residue that may interact with NAD(H) and is
necessary for efficient electron transfer [10]. Two iterations on OWL26.2
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found:
reductase components of Pseudomonas putida naphthalene dioxygenase (JN0640,
JN0642) and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon dioxygenase (A55217) lack motif
2; and Pseudomonas pickettii toluene-3-monooxygenase reductase (PPU04052)
and Vibrio alginolyticus Na+-translocating NADH-quinone reductase 
(VIBNQR363) lack motif 5. Surprisingly, the mmoC component of Methylosinus 
trichosporium methane monooxygenase (C48360), which is functionally 
identical to the mmoC protein of Methylococcus capsulatus (MEMC_METCA), 
lacks motifs 5 and 6 (motif 6 is well conserved among most FPNCRs).
Pseudomonas cepacia 2-halobenzoate 1,2-dioxygenase reductase (PCCBDABC3)
lacks motifs 2 and 5; Pseudomonas mendocina toluene-4-monooxygenase
component tmoF (A47016) and Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes phenoxybenzoate
dioxygenase pobB (S44172) lack motifs 3 and 5. All these proteins are
[2Fe-2S] ferredoxin/FPNCR fusion enzymes, except S44172, which has a
[2Fe-2S] ferredoxin domain at its C-terminus. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 19 sequences, and 146
partial matches.
