CYTCHROMECID
Cytochromes c (cyt c) can be defined as electron-transfer proteins having
one or several haem c groups, bound to the protein by one or, more
generally, two thioether bonds involving sulphydryl groups of cysteine
residues. The fifth haem iron ligand is always provided by a histidine
residue. Cyt c possess a wide range of properties and function in a large
number of different redox processes [1].

Ambler [2] recognised four classes of cyt c. Class I includes the low-spin
soluble cyt c of mitochondria and bacteria, with the haem-attachment site
towards the N-terminus, and the sixth ligand provided by a methionine
residue about 40 residues further on towards the C-terminus. On the basis
of sequence similarity, class I cyt c were further subdivided into five
classes, IA to IE. Class ID (cyt c8) includes such bacterial proteins as 
Pseudomonas spp. cyt c-551, Hydrogenobacter thermophilus cyt c-552 and 
Rhodospirillum tenue cyt c-553 [2]. Sequence characteristics include several
Pro residues around the sixth ligand Met, and a conserved Trp residue near
the C-terminus.
 
The 3D structures of cyt c-551 from Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Pseudomonas
stutzeri have been determined [3]. The proteins consist of 5 alpha-helices;
three "core" helices form a "basket" around the haem group, with one haem 
edge exposed to the solvent. 

CYTCHROMECID is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for class 
ID cyt c. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 9
sequences: motifs 1 and 2 are adjacent, motif 1 including helix 2, two
invariant Cys residues of which covalently bind the haem group, and a His
residue providing the fifth haem iron ligand (cf. PROSITE pattern
CYTOCHROME_C); motif 4 spans a Pro-rich region between helices 4 and 5, and
includes an invariant Met, which provides the sixth haem iron ligand; and
motifs 3 and 5 contain conserved Trp residues. Two iterations on OWL28.0
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, a Pseudo-
monas hydrogenothermophila cyt c-552 fragment that lacks motifs 4 and 5. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences.
