TYPE3IMRPROT
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens, such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[2] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [3]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [3], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

It is believed that the family of type III inner membrane proteins are 
used as structural moieties in a complex with several other subunits [4]. 
One such set of inner membrane proteins, labeled "R" here for nomenclature 
purposes, includes the Salmonella and Shigella SpaR, the Yersinia YscT, 
Rhizobium Y4YN, and the Erwinia HrcT genes [4]. The flagellar protein FliR 
also shares similarity, probably due to evolution of the type III secretion 
system from the flagellar biosynthetic pathway. 

TYPE3IMRPROT is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type III secretion system inner membrane R protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from short conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - 
motifs 1 and 2 include the C-terminal portions of putative TM domains 1 and
3; motif 3 encodes putative TM domain 6; and motif 4 includes the N-terminal
residues of putative TM domain 7. Three iterations on OWL30.2 were required 
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 17 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are 
homologues that fail to match one or more motifs. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 22 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
