KUNITZINHBTR
The Kunitz-type soybean trypsin inhibitor (STI) family consists mainly of
inhibitors of trypsin and other serine proteases from Leguminosae seeds 
[1]. The STIs belong to a superfamily that also contains the interleukin-1 
proteins, heparin binding growth factors (HBGF) and histactophilin, all of 
which have very similar structures, but share no sequence similarity with 
the STI family.

Inhibitors from cereals are active against subtilisin and endogenous
alpha-amylases, while some also inhibit tissue plasminogen activator. 
The inhibitors are usually specific for either trypsin or chymotrypsin, and
some are effective against both. They are thought to protect the seeds
against consumption by animal predators, while at the same time existing as
seed storage proteins themselves - all the actively inhibitory members
contain 2 disulphide bridges. The existence of a member with no
inhibitory activity, winged bean albumin 1, suggests that the inhibitors
may have evolved from seed storage proteins.
                                
The crystal structures of soybean trypsin inhibitor (STI), trypsin 
inhibitor DE-3 from Erythrina caffra (ETI) [2] and the bifunctional 
proteinase K/alpha-amylase inhibitor from wheat (PK13) have been solved,
showing them to share the same 12-stranded beta-sheet structure as those 
of interleukin-1 and heparin-binding growth factors [3]. The beta-sheets
are arranged in 3 similar lobes around a central axis, 6 strands forming 
an anti-parallel beta-barrel. Despite the structural similarity, STI shows
no interleukin-1 bioactivity, presumably as a result of their primary 
sequence disparities. The active inhibitory site containing the scissile 
bond is located in the loop between beta-strands 4 and 5 in STI and ETI.
                                
KUNITZINHBTR is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kunitz-type soybean trypsin inhibitors. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 4 sequences, the motifs being drawn from the beta-
sheet regions, which are generally more conserved than the loops between 
them: motif 1 spans the N-terminus and strands 1 and 2; motif 2 spans 
strands 3 and 4; motif 3 strands 8 and 9; and motif 4 strands 10 and 12.
Three iterations on OWL17.1 were required to reach convergence, at which
point most of the known members of the family were identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 51 sequences, and 12
partial matches.
