NIAPOTYPTASE
Cysteine protease activity is dependent on an active dyad of cysteine and
histidine, the order and spacing of these residues varying in the known 
families. Nearly half of all cysteine proteases are found exclusively
in viruses [1]. Cysteine protease families have been grouped into five 
clans (designated CA, CB, CC, CD and CE) on the basis of structural and
functional similarity. Families C1, C2 and C10, which belong to the CA clan,
have a Cys/His catalytic diad, and are loosely termed papain-like. Families
in the CB clan have a His/Cys diad, and contain enzymes from RNA viruses
distantly related to chymotrypsin. Enzymes in clan CC are also from RNA
viruses, but have a papain-like Cys/His active site. The remaining two
clans, CD and CE, contain only one family each. Some families have not
yet been asigned to a clan [1-3]. 

Two additional clans (PA and PB) have been identified, these containing a
mixture of serine, cysteine and threonine proteases. Clan PA contains a
catalytically-active serine or cysteine nucleophilic residue as part of the
ordered triad His, Asp, Ser (or Cys). Clan PB contains a serine, cysteine or
threonine active residue at the N-terminus of the mature protease [3]. 

Nuclear inclusion A (NIA) proteases from potyviruses belong to the C4 
cysteine protease family, which is part of the PB clan [1,2,4]. Potyviruses
include plant viruses in which the single-stranded RNA encodes a polyprotein
with NIA protease activity, where proteolytic cleavage is specific for
Gln+Gly sites. The NIA protease acts on the polyprotein, releasing itself 
by Gln+Gly cleavage at both the N- and C-termini. It further processes the
polyprotein by cleavage at five similar sites in the C-terminal half of the
sequence. In addition to its C-terminal protease activity, the NIA protease 
contains an N-terminal domain that has been implicated in the transcription
process [1]. 

NIAPOTYPTASE is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
potyvirus nuclear inclusion proteases (C4 cysteine protease). The
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the 
motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually the full 
length of the NIA protease domain. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 52 sequences was 
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are NIA
fragments that lack portions of sequence bearing a number of motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 41 sequences, and 5
partial matches.
