CUATPASEI
Proteins that transport heavy metals in micro-organisms and mammals share
similarities in their sequences and structures. These proteins provide an
important focus for research, some being involved in bacterial resistance
to toxic metals, such as lead and cadmium, while others are involved in
inherited human syndromes, such as Wilson and Menkes diseases [1].

A conserved 30-residue domain has been found in a number of these heavy
metal transport or detoxification proteins [1]. The domain, which has been
termed Heavy-Metal-Associated (HMA), contains two conserved cysteines that
are probably involved in metal binding. 

The HMA domain has been identified in the N-terminal regions of a variety
of cation-transporting ATPases (E1-E2 ATPases): the human copper ATPases 
involved in Wilson and Menkes diseases (ATP7A and ATP7B) each contain 6 
tandem copies; a chromosomal Staphylococcus aureus cadA contains two copies;
and the copper ATPases CCC2 from budding yeast, copA from Enterococcus 
faecalis, synA from Synechococcus, and cadmium ATPases cadA from Bacillus 
firmus and plasmid pI258 from Staphylococcus aureus contain a single copy.
Other ATPases that contain the HMA domain include: fixI from Rhizobium 
meliloti; pacS from Synechococcus strain PCC 7942; Mycobacterium leprae 
ctpA and ctpB; and Escherichia coli hypothetical protein yhhO. In addition,
the domain has been found in bacterial mercuric reductase; the copP copper-
binding protein of Helicobacter pylori; and in bacterial mercuric transport
proteins.

The structure of the mercuric ion-binding protein MerP from Shigella
flexneri has been determined. The fold has been classed as a ferredoxin-like
alpha-beta sandwich, having a beta-alpha beta-beta alpha-beta architecture,
with the two alpha-helices overlaying a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-
sheet [2]. Structural differences between the reduced and mercury-bound 
forms of merP are localised to the metal-binding loop containing the 
consensus sequence GMTCXXC, the two cysteines of which are involved in
bi-coordination of Hg(2+) [2].

Copper-transporting ATPase 1 (ATP7A and ATP7B) is thought to function in 
the export of copper, and possibly other metals, from the cytoplasm to an 
intracellular organelle. The protein functions as a monomer and is an 
integral membrane protein, with 8 predicted transmembrane (TM) domains,
possibly inserted into the membrane of a subcellular compartment. ATP7A is
found in most tissues, except liver. Defects in the protein, resulting in
defective absorption and transport of copper, are associated with Menkes
syndrome (also known as kinky hair disease), an X-linked recessive disease
characterised by progressive neurodegeneration and connective-tissue 
disturbances, focal cerebral and cerebellar degeneration, early retardation
in growth, peculiar hair, hipopigmentation, vascular complications and death
in early childhood. 

Defects in ATP7B are associated with Wilson disease, an autosomal recessive
disorder of copper metabolism in which copper cannot be incorporated into
ceruloplasmin in liver, and cannot be excreted from the liver into the bile.
Copper thus accumulates in the liver, and ultimately in the brain and kidney,
leading to neurological manifestations and signs of cirrhosis.

CUATPASEI is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type I
copper transporting ATPases (ATP7A and ATP7B). The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions within the N-terminal and central portions of the
alignment - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus, motif 1 spanning the
first alpha-helix and the N-terminal residues of strand 2, and motif 2 
spanning strands 2 and 3; motif 7 spans putative TM domain 1; motif 8 
encodes putative TM domain 2; and motif 9 includes the N-terminal residues 
of TM domain 3. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, 
at which point a true set comprising 15 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are fragments or homologues
that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 10 sequences, and 13
partial matches.
