OPSINBLUE
Opsins, the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision [1,2], are
integral membrane proteins that belong to a superfamily of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs). The activating ligands of the different superfamily
members vary widely in structure and character, yet the proteins appear
faithfully to have conserved a basic structural framework, believed to
consist of 7 transmembrane (TM) helices. Although the sequences of these
proteins are very diverse, reflecting to some extent this broad range of
activating ligands, nevertheless, motifs have been identified in the TM
regions that are characteristic of virtually the entire superfamily [3,4].
Amongst the exceptions are the olfactory receptors, which cluster together
in a subfamily, which lacks significant matches with domains 2, 4 and 6.
Interestingly, the opsins also seem to be emerging as increasingly atypical
of the superfamily, clustering most strongly, in phylogenetic analyses, with
the olfactory receptors [4]. 

The visual pigments comprise an apoprotein (opsin), covalently linked to
the chromophore 11-cis-retinal. The covalent link is in the form of a
protonated Schiff base between the retinal and a lysine residue located in
TM domain 7. Vision is effected through the absorption of a photon by the
chromophore, which is isomerised to the all-trans form, promoting a
conformational change in the protein.

Opsins are the photoreceptors of animal retinas [5]: vertebrate rhodopsin
is found in rod cells and mediates scotopic vision; red, green and blue
opsins are found in cone cells and mediate photopic vision. Blue-sensitive
opsin has an absorption maximum at 420nm. The ratio of blue cones to rods
is ~1:200 [5]. Deficiency in blue opsin results in tritanopia colour
blindness.

OPSINBLUE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for blue-
sensitive opsins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the blue-sensitive opsins but distinguish them from the
rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the
N-terminus; motif 3 spans the second external loop; motif 4 spans the
N-terminal half of TM domain 5; motif 5 spans the third external loop; and
motif 6 lies at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL28.1 was required
to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the
starting set. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are
closely related green-sensitive opsins or rhodopsins. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 13 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
