OPIOIDR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The term opioid refers to a class of substance that produces its effects
via the major classes of opioid receptor, termed mu, delta and kappa [6].
The receptors are found in the CNS and certain smooth muscles: mu-opioid
receptors are believed to mediate analgesia, hypothermia, respiratory
depression, miosis, bradycardia, nausea, euphoria and physical dependence,
beta-endorphin being the most potent endogenous ligand; delta-receptors
mediate analgesia; and kappa-opioid receptors are believed to mediate
analgesia, sedation, miosis and diuresis, dynorphin being the most potent
endogenous ligand.

A human placental protein that binds opioid ligands with moderate affinity
has been provisionally classified as an opioid receptor [6]. However, it is
not selective for kappa-ligands and is 93% similar to the human NK3
tachykinin receptor, although it doesn't bind tachykinins.   

OPIOIDR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the opioid
receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either loop
or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that characterise
the opioid receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-
like superfamily - motif 1 spans part of the first cytoplasmic loop and
TM domain 2; motif 2 lies in TM domain 2; motifs 3 and 4 span the second
and third cytoplasmic loops res.; and motifs 5 and 6 lie at the N- and
C-termini of TM domain 7. Two iterations on OWL26.0 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 20 sequences was
identfied. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are
somatostatin receptors that match motifs 1, 2 and 6. Notably, the putative
placental opioid receptor was not identified by this signature.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences, and 17
partial matches.
