MASONCOGENE
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The mas oncogene was discovered following co-transfection with DNA isolated
from a human epidermal carcinoma [6]. It efficiently induces tumorigenicity
and has weak focus-inducing activity in NIH 3T3 cells. To date, it is the
only oncogene to have been sequenced that encodes a 7TM protein [6]. It has
been claimed that mas is a receptor for angiotensin, but this view has not
found wide acceptance. In the CNS, high levels of the mas oncogene
transcript are present in the cerebral cortex, with lower amounts in the
hippocampus and cerebellum. In the periphery, it is expressed in low levels
in the kidney, adrenals and liver [6]. The rat RTA protein has some
similarity to the mas oncogene sequence. 

MASONCOGENE is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
mas oncogene transcript. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the mas oncogene sequences but
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1
lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 encodes part of TM domain 2 and the first
external loop; motif 3 spans the second external loop; motif 4 spans the
third cytoplasmic loop; motif 5 spans the third external loop; and motifs
6 and 7 lie at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL28.0 was required
to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the
starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences.
