HEMAGGLUTN2
The haemagglutinin (HA) glycoprotein of influenza is a trimer containing 
three structurally distinct regions: a globular head of anti-parallel 
beta-sheet, which contains the receptor binding site and the variable
antigenic determinants (antigenic variation in haemagglutinin is
associated with recurrent epidemics of respiratory diseases in man); a
triple-stranded, coiled-coil, alpha-helical stalk; and a globular foot of
anti-parallel beta-sheet [1-4]. 

The structural domains of haemagglutinin are arranged broadly as follows:
a large globular, hydrophilic, carbohydrate-containing domain resides on 
the external suface of the membrane; a small, uncharged hydrophobic peptide
spans the membrane; and a smaller globular, hydrophilic domain resides on
the inside of the membrane. Each monomer in the structure comprises two
disulphide-linked chains, HA1 and HA2. The N-terminus of HA1 provides a 
central strand in the 5-stranded globular foot, the chain then making its
way to the globular head, where it forms an 8-stranded Swiss-roll. HA2
provides two alpha-helices, which form part of the fibrous structure
(three helices, one from each monomer, pack together as the triple-stranded
coiled-coil that stablises the trimer), its C-terminus providing the
remaining strands of the 5-stranded globular foot.

HEMAGGLUTN2 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
the haemagglutinin HA2 chain. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: motif 1 encodes the first right-handed alpha-
helix; motifs 2 and 3 span the second long alpha-helix; motif 4 spans a
short stretch of beta-strand and the third alpha-helix; and motif 5 encodes
the fourth short helix. Two iterations on OWL22.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 152 sequences was
identified. Sixteen partial matches were also found, most of which are
haemagglutinin fragments that match only motifs 1 and 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 174 sequences, and 1
partial match.
