CCYSTOKNINAR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Cholecystokinins (CCKs) and gastrins are naturally-occurring peptides that
share a common C-terminal sequence, GWMDF; full biological activity resides
in this region [6]. In the periphery, the principal physiological actions
of CCK include gall bladder contraction, pancreatic enzyme secretion and
regulation of secretion/absorption in the gastrointestinal tract [6]. In
the CNS, CCK induces analgesia, satiety and a decrease in exploratory
behaviour. In mesolimbic and mesocortical neurons, CCK coexists with
dopamine [6]. It is found throughout the digestive tract, with high
concentrations in the duodenum and jejunum. It is also found in peripheral
nerves to other smooth muscles and to secretory glands, and is one of the
most abundant peptides in the brain [6]. The highest levels of the CCKA
receptor are found in peripheral tissues, notably the pancreas, stomach,
intestine and gall bladder [6]. It has only a limited distribution in the
brain. The receptor has been implicated in the pathogenesis of schizo-
phrenia, Parkinson's disease, drug addiction and feeding disorders.

CCYSTOKNINAR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cholecystokinin type A receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on
those areas of the alignment that characterise the CCKA receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1
lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 spans the second external loop; motifs 3-5
spans the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs 6 and 7 lie at the C-terminus. 
A single iteration on OWL28.0 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequence being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
