BRADYKINNB1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Bradykinins (BKs) are a family of short, structurally similar peptides that 
activate sensory fibres, contract venous smooth muscle, stimulate release
of cytokines, induce connective tissue proliferation and mediate endo-
thelium-dependent vasodilation [6]. BK antagonists are of potential use
in the treatment of inflammation, asthma, mild pain and endotoxic shock.
BK receptors are widespread in peripheral tissues, and at least 3 different
receptor subtypes have been proposed, designated B1, B2 and B3. 

B2 is the predominant bradykinin subtype. The B1 receptor has limited
distribution in the periphery, but has not been described in the CNS [6].
It stimulates contraction of rabbit aorta and rat duodenum, and mediates
relaxation of rabbit mesenteric and coeliac arteries [6]. In rabbit 
vascular smooth muscle, the expression of B1 receptors is increased
following various pathological insults, in vitro or in vivo [6]. In the
majority of tissues, bradykinin induces activation of phosphoinositide
metabolism via a pertussis-toxin-insensitive G protein, probably of the
Gq/G11 class [6]. It has also been reported to inhibit adenylyl cyclase
through a persussis-toxin-insensitive G protein, and to raise levels of
cGMP and open ion channels. It also stimulates PLA2, possibly by direct
activation of a G protein.

BRADYKINNB1R is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the B1 bradykinin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections 
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment 
that characterise the B1 bradykinin receptors but distinguish them from the 
rest of the bradykinin receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 span the N-terminus,
leading into TM domain 1; motif 3 encodes the central portion of TM domain
3; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 4, leading into the second
external loop; motif 5 spans the C-terminus of the second cytoplasmic loop
and the N-terminal portion of TM domain 5; motifs 6 and 7 span the 
C-terminus of TM domain 5, the third cytoplasmic loop and the N-terminal
portion of TM domain 6; and motif 8 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 6,
leading into the third external loop. A single iteration on OWL30.2 was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
