PINOPSIN
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Visual pigments are the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision [6,7].
They comprise an apoprotein (opsin), covalently linked to the chromophore
cis-retinal. Vision is effected through the absorption of a photon by the
chromophore, which is isomerised to the all-trans form, promoting a
conformational change in the protein.

Recently, a non-visual opsin (designated P-opsin or pinopsin) has been
isolated from chick pineal gland [8,9]. Environmental light signals reset
the phase of the endogenous circadian pacemaker that controls the rhythmic
production of melatonin via this protein [9]. Sharing ~45% identity with
retinal opsins, pinopsin is thought to have diverged early in opsin
evolution [9]. The protein is maximally sensitive to light of wavelength
~500nm and produces a slow, prolonged photo-transduction response consistent
with the non-visual function of pineal photo-reception. 

PINOPSIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for pineal
opsins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections largely within
loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the pineal opsins but distinguish them from the rest of the
opsin family - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus, leading into TM domain 1;
motif 2 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 2 and part of the first external
loop; motif 3 spans part of the the second external loop, leading into TM
domain 5; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 6 and the third
external loop; and motif 5 lies at the C-terminus. A single iteration on
OWL29.1 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences.
