ENDOTHELINAR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Endothelins play an important role in the regulation of the cardiovascular
system [6]. They are the most potent vasoconstrictors identified, they
stimulate cardiac contraction, regulate release of vasoactive substances,
and stimulate mitogenesis in blood vessels in primary culture. They also
stimulate contraction in almost all other smooth muscles (e.g., uterus,
bronchus, vas deferens, stomach) and stimulate secretion in several tissues
(e.g., kidney, liver and adrenals) [6]. Endothelin receptors have also been
found in the brain (e.g., in the cerebral cortex, cerebellum and glial
cells). Endothelins have been implicated in a variety of pathophysiological
conditions associated with stress [6].

The ETA receptor is the predominant type of endothelin receptor [6]. It
mediates contraction in blood vessels, bronchus, uterus and heart; it also
inhibits aldosterone secretion. The receptors have been identified in glial
cells in the CNS. They activate the phosphoinositide pathway through a
pertussis-toxin-insensitive G protein, probably of the Gq/G11 class [6].

ENDOTHELINAR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
the endothelin-A receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections   
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the endothelin-A receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs
1-3 span the N-terminus; motif 4 spans the first external loop; motif 5
spans the second external loop; and motifs 6 and 7 lie at the C-terminus.
A single iteration on OWL28.1 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. A single partial match
was also found, A54126, an endothelin AX-receptor that matches motifs 4-7.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
