ALYTICPTASE
Proteolytic enzymes that use serine in their catalytic machinery are 
widespread and numerous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes
[1]. They encompass a range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase,
endopeptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase. More than 20 serine
protease families (denoted S1 - S27) have been identified, which have been
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
and functional similarities [1]. Structures from four clans have been
examined (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be unrelated, suggesting at 
least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidase, and possibly many more
[1]. Since that examination, structural representations from the other two 
clan members (SF, SG) have been determined [3].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

Alpha-lytic endopeptidases belong to the chymotrypisin (SA) clan, within
which they have been assigned to subfamily A of the S2 family (S2A) [2,3].
Since the original classification, the S2 family has been split into three
subfamilies [3] on the basis of sequence similarity [1,2]. S2 proteases
are only known to be expressed in bacteria, from which they are secreted to
act externally [1]. These proteases have endopeptidase activity, which is
specific for basic, hydrophobic or alanine P1 residues. The alpha-lytic 
endopeptidase family also contains members that can cleave glutamyl
bonds [1]. 

ALYTICPTASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
alpha-lytic endopeptidase (S2A) family of serine proteases. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions around the active site residues - motif 1 spans the 
C-terminus of the fourth beta-strand, helix 1 and the N-terminus of the 
fifth strand (it includes the region encoded by the PROSITE pattern 
TRYPSIN_HIS (PS00135), which contains the catalytic histidine); motif 2 
spans strands 10, 11 and the N-terminus of strand 12; motif 3 encodes the 
remainder of strand 12; motif 4 spans strands 13 and 14, and includes the 
region encoded by the PROSITE pattern TRYPSIN_SER (PS00135), which contains
the catalytic serine; and motif 5 encodes strand 15. Two iterations on 
OWL30.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 22 sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences.
