CUATPASE
Proteins that transport heavy metals in micro-organisms and mammals share
similarities in their sequences and structures. These proteins provide an
important focus for research, some being involved in bacterial resistance
to toxic metals, such as lead and cadmium, while others are involved in
inherited human syndromes, such as Wilson and Menkes diseases [1].

A conserved 30-residue domain has been found in a number of these heavy
metal transport or detoxification proteins [1]. The domain, which has been
termed Heavy-Metal-Associated (HMA), contains two conserved cysteines that
are probably involved in metal binding. 

The HMA domain has been identified in the N-terminal regions of a variety
of cation-transporting ATPases (E1-E2 ATPases): the human copper ATPases 
involved in Wilson and Menkes diseases (ATP7A and ATP7B) each contain 6 
tandem copies; a chromosomal Staphylococcus aureus cadA contains two copies;
and the copper ATPases CCC2 from budding yeast, copA from Enterococcus 
faecalis, synA from Synechococcus, and cadmium ATPases cadA from Bacillus 
firmus and plasmid pI258 from Staphylococcus aureus contain a single copy.
Other ATPases that contain the HMA domain include: fixI from Rhizobium 
meliloti; pacS from Synechococcus strain PCC 7942; Mycobacterium leprae 
ctpA and ctpB; and Escherichia coli hypothetical protein yhhO. In addition,
the domain has been found in bacterial mercuric reductase; the copP copper-
binding protein of Helicobacter pylori; and in bacterial mercuric transport
proteins.

The structure of the mercuric ion-binding protein MerP from Shigella
flexneri has been determined. The fold has been classed as a ferredoxin-like
alpha-beta sandwich, having a beta-alpha beta-beta alpha-beta architecture,
with the two alpha-helices overlaying a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-
sheet [2]. Structural differences between the reduced and mercury-bound 
forms of merP are localised to the metal-binding loop containing the 
consensus sequence GMTCXXC, the two cysteines of which are involved in
bi-coordination of Hg(2+) [2].

Copper-transporting ATPase from Helicobacter pylori is an integral membrane,
with 8 predicted transmembrane (TM) domains. The protein, which contains a
single copy of the HMA domain, catalyses the reaction:

		ATP + H(2)O = ADP + orthophosphate

CUATPASE is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial copper-transporting ATPases. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans helix 1
and the N-terminal half of strand 2; motif 2 includes helix 2; motif 3 spans
putative TM domain 2; motif 5 includes the C-terminal residues of putative
TM domain 4; motif 7 lies within putative TM domain 5; and motif 11 includes
the C-terminal residues of TM domain 7. A single iteration on OWL30.2 was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are
closely related metal-binding ATPases that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
