GLYCHORMONER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The gonadotrophins (luteinising hormone, choriogonadotrophin, follicle-
stimulating hormone) and thyroid-stimulating hormone are heterotrimeric
glycoproteins composed of a common alpha-subunit and distinct beta-subunits
[6]. The carbohydrate moiety of the glycoproteins has an essential role in
receptor recognition. The receptors share close sequence similarity, and
are characterised by large extracellular domains believed to be involved
in hormone binding [6].

GLYCHORMONER is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
glycoprotein hormone receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the glycoprotein hormone receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 was drawn from
the N-terminal region leading into TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the first
cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 spans the first external loop; motif 4 lies in
TM domain 3; motif 5 lies at the C-terminus of TM domain 4 leading into the
second external loop; motif 6 spans the third cytoplasmic loop and part of
TM domain 6; and motif 7 spans the third external loop leading into TM 
domain 7. Two iterations on OWL26.0 were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 19 sequences was identfied. Four partial
matches were also found, three of which are hormone receptor fragments,
and the fourth is a putative GPCR from the great pond snail, which is
highly similar to 3 of the motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 26 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
