PREPILNPTASE
Cysteine protease activity is dependent on an active dyad of cysteine and
histidine, the order and spacing of these residues varying in the 20 or so
known families. Cysteine proteases have been grouped into two clans (CA and
CB). Families C1, C2 and C10 are loosely termed papain-like and belong 
to clan CA; five cysteine proteases belong to clan CB; other families have
not been assigned to clans. Nearly half of all cysteine proteases are found 
exclusively in viruses. The order of catalytic cysteine and histidine 
residues within the primary structure differs between the families and is 
an indication of convergent evolution [1-3].

Bacteria produce a number of protein precursors that undergo post-
translational methylation and proteolysis prior to secretion as active
proteins. Type IV prepilin leader peptidases, which belong to the C20 family
of cysteine proteases, are enzymes that mediate this type of post-
translational modification. Type IV pilin is a protein found on the surface
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and other Gram-negative
pathogens. Pilin subunits attach the infecting organism to the surface of 
host epithelial cells. They are synthesised as prepilin subunits, which 
differ from mature pilin by virtue of containing a 6-8 residue leader
peptide consisting of charged amino acids. Mature type IV pilins also
contain a methylated N-terminal phenylalanine residue. 

Prepilin leader peptidases are found on the cytosolic membrane surface,
where they have dual activity, involving cleavage of glycine-phenylalanine
bonds and methylation of the newly-revealed N-terminal phenylalanine. The
consensus sequence for the site of proteolytic cleavage is -G+F-T-L/I-, in
which the Gly P1 residue is essential [1]. The peptidases are suseptible to 
thiol blocking reagents. Site directed mutagenesis has indicated four highly
conserved cysteine residues that affect both the protease and methylase 
activity.

PREPILNPTASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
type IV leaderpeptidase (C20) family of cysteine proteases. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the central portion of the alignment. Two
iterations on OWL30.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 19 sequences was found. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 23 sequences, and 5
partial matches.
