V5ALLERGEN
A number of eukaryotic extracellular proteins have been shown to be
evolutionarily related. The family includes rodent sperm-coating glyco-
protein (or acidic epididymal glycoprotein), which is thought to be involved
in sperm maturation [1]; mammalian testis-specific protein (Tpx-1) [2];
mammalian glioma pathogenesis-related protein; lizard helothermine, a toxin
that blocks ryanodine receptors; venom allergen 5 from vespid wasps and
venom allergen 3 from fire ants, which are potent allergens that mediate
allergic reactions to stings from insects of the hymenoptera family [3];
plant pathogenesis proteins of the PR-1 family [4], which are synthesised
during pathogen infection or other stress-related responses; proteins Sc7
and Sc14 from the basidiomycete fungus Schizophyllum commune, which are
loosely associated with fruiting body hyphal walls [5]; ancylostoma secreted
protein from dog hookworm; and yeast hypothetical proteins YJL078c, YJL079c
and YKR013w. The precise functions of these proteins is still unclear.

Ag 5 is a major allergen of vespid venom [3]. The complete amino acid
sequences of Ag 5 from various species of hornet, wasp and yellow jacket
have been determined. Regions of conservation have been identified that are
shared both by a family of proteins from human, mouse and rat testis, and
by a class of pathogenesis-related proteins from tobacco and tomato leaves
[3]. The sequences also share similarity with the Solenopsis invicta 3
allergen from imported fire ant venom [6].

V5ALLERGEN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
venom allergen 5 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved
sections spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
regions that characterise the vespid and fire ant venom allergens but
distinguish them from the rest of the family - motif 7 includes the region
encoded by PROSITE pattern SCP_AG5_PR1_SC7_1 (PS01009), which lies towards
the C-terminus. Two iterations on OWL29.6 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are related extracellular
proteins that match motifs 3, 4 and 7.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 16 sequences, and 14
partial matches.
