HEATSHOCK70
Organisms respond to stress (e.g., increased temperatures, exposure to amino
acid homologues or metabolic inhibitors, or infection with some DNA tumor
viruses) by synthesising heat shock proteins [1]. Among this family is a
group of well-conserved proteins with an approximate molecular weight of
70 kDa, known as the hsp70 family, most species having several proteins
belonging to this family. Some of these members are only expressed under 
stress conditions (strictly inducible), while some are present in cells 
under normal growth conditions [2] and are not heat-inducible [3] 
(constitutive or cognate). 

Little is known of the function of hsp70 proteins, although there is some
evidence to suggest that the constitutive members have a role in the
disassembly of clathrin cages [2], and may also participate in the post-
translational transmembrane targetting of proteins to cellular organelles.
No specific activities or associations have been found for the inducible
members [2], although it has been suggested that they may accept incoming
precursor proteins, keep them unfolded, then pass them on to the 
hsp60/hsp10 (cpn60/cpn10) complex for folding and assembly.

The constitutive forms of hsp70 possess ATPase activity. The ATPase domain 
exists as 2 lobes of approximately equal size, with a deep cleft between 
them. The lobes can be subdivided into a lower and an upper domain, the 
lower domain being composed of 5-stranded beta sheets flanked by alpha-
helices, and the upper domain comprising a different combination of alpha-
helices and anti-parallel beta sheets. Although the mechanism of the ATPase
activity is as yet unknown, the domain is structurally similar to that of 
yeast hexokinase, suggesting that it may have kinase activity [2].

HEATSHOCK70 is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
70kDa heat shock proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 12 sequences: motif 1 includes the N-terminal pentapeptide
encoded by PROSITE pattern HSP70_1 (PS00297), and motif 5 spans part of
the conserved octapeptide encoded by PROSITE pattern HSP70_2 (PS00329). Two
iterations on OWL17.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 72 sequences was identified, together with 26 partial
matches, most of which are fragments (the large number of fragments results
from artificial cDNA clone translations).

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 285 sequences, and 64
partial matches.
