CYTCHRMECIAB
Cytochromes c (cyt c) can be defined as electron-transfer proteins having
one or several haem c groups, bound to the protein by one or, more
generally, two thioether bonds involving sulphydryl groups of cysteine
residues. The fifth haem iron ligand is always provided by a histidine
residue. Cyt c possess a wide range of properties and function in a large
number of different redox processes [1].

Ambler [2] recognised four classes of cyt c. Class I includes the low-spin
soluble cyt c of mitochondria and bacteria, with the haem-attachment site
towards the N-terminus, and the sixth ligand provided by a methionine
residue about 40 residues further on towards the C-terminus. On the basis
of sequence similarity, class I cyt c were further subdivided into five
classes, IA to IE. Class IB includes the eukaryotic mitochondrial cyt c
and prokaryotic "short" cyt c2 exemplified by Rhodopseudomonas globiformis
cyt c2; Class IA includes "long" cyt c2, such as Rhodospirillum rubrum
cyt c2 and Aquaspirillum itersonii cyt c-550, which have several extra
loops by comparison with Class IB cyt c.

The 3D structures of a considerable number of class IA and IB cyt c have
been determined [3]. The proteins consist of 3-6 alpha-helices; the three
most conserved "core" helices form a "basket" around the haem group, with
one haem edge exposed to the solvent. Most class I cyt c have conserved
aromatic residues clustered around the haem and axial ligands [3].

CYTCHRMECIAB is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for class
IA and IB cyt c. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 33
sequences: motif 1 is situated in the loop between helices 1 and 2, and
includes two invariant Cys residues, which covalently bind the haem group,
and the His residue that provides the fifth haem iron ligand (cf. PROSITE
pattern CYTOCHROME_C); motifs 3-6 contain conserved aromatic residues, the
Trp residue of motif 4 being invariant among the mitochondrial cyt c; and
motif 5 includes an invariant Met, which provides the sixth haem iron ligand.
Three iterations on OWL28.0 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 132 sequences was identified. Several partial
matches were also found: CYC_KLULA, CYC_NEUCR, C550_NITWI and A56280 lack
motif 6; CY2_RHORU, NRL_2C2C, CY2_RHOSH and C551_ERYSP lack motif 3;
CYC_TRYBB lacks motif 1; RSU35437 is an R.sphaeroides cyt c fragment that
matches the first three motifs; and the sequences matching only 2 motifs
are class I cyt c that neither belong to class IA or IB.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 107 sequences, and 42
partial matches.
