DEUTEROLYSIN
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. This HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship [1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1].

Deuterolysin is a microbial zinc-containing metalloprotease that shows 
some similarity to thermolysin [2]. The protein is expressed with a
possible 19-residue signal sequence, a 155-residue propeptide, and an
active peptide of 177 residues [3]. The latter contains an HEXXH motif
towards the C-terminus, but the other zinc ligands are as yet undetermined
[2,3].

DEUTEROLYSIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
deuterolysin (M35) family of metalloproteases. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
virtually the full length of the active peptide, motif 1 containing a
conserved Glu residue that may contribute to zinc binding, and motif 4
including the region encoded by PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142),
which contains the HEXXH motif. Two iterations on OWL29.3 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 4 sequences was
identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
