VITAMINDR
Steroid or nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) constitute an important super-
family of transcription regulators that are involved in widely diverse 
physiological functions, including control of embryonic development, cell
differentiation and homeostasis [1]. Members of the superfamily include the
steroid hormone receptors and receptors for thyroid hormone, retinoids, 
1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3 and a variety of other ligands. The proteins 
function as dimeric molecules in nuclei to regulate the transcription of 
target genes in a ligand-responsive manner [2,3]. In addition to C-terminal
ligand-binding domains, these nuclear receptors contain a highly-conserved,
N-terminal zinc-finger that mediates specific binding to target DNA 
sequences, termed ligand-responsive elements. In the absence of ligand,
steroid hormone receptors are thought to be weakly associated with nuclear
components; hormone binding greatly increases receptor affinity.

NRs are extremely important in medical research, a large number of them
being implicated in diseases such as cancer, diabetes, hormone resistance
syndromes, etc. [1]. While several NRs act as ligand-inducible transcription
factors, many do not yet have a defined ligand and are accordingly termed 
"orphan" receptors. During the last decade, more than 300 NRs have been
described, many of which are orphans, which cannot easily be named due to 
current nomenclature confusions in the literature. However, a new system 
has recently been introduced in an attempt to rationalise the increasingly 
complex set of names used to describe superfamily members [1].

The vitamin D receptor (VDR) mediates the signal of 1-a,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D3 by binding to vitamin D responsive elements - it functions either as a 
homodimer, or as a heterodimer of vitamin D and retinoid X receptor
subunits. Deficiency of VDR causes type IIA rickets [2].  

VITAMINDR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
vitamin D receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 7 sequences: motif 1 encodes part of the zinc finger region; motif 2 
resides wholly within the zinc finger region; motifs 3 and 4 lie in the
hinge region; and motifs 5 and 6 reside in the ligand-binding domain.
Three iterations on SPTR57.15_40.15f were required to reach convergence, at 
which point a true set comprising 24 sequences was identified. Four partial 
matches were also found, all of which are translated nucleotide sequences 
that fail to match one or more motifs.
