GASTRINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Gastrins and cholecystokinins (CCKs) are naturally-occurring peptides that
share a common C-terminal sequence, GWMDF; full biological activity resides
in this region [6]. The principal physiological role of gastrin is to 
stimulate acid secretion in the stomach; it also has trophic effects on
gastric mucosa [6]. Gastrin is produced from a single gene transcript, and
is found predominantly in the stomach and intestine, but also in vagal
nerves. The CCKB receptor has a widespread distribution in the CNS and
has been implicated in the pathogenesis of panic-anxiety attacks caused
by CCK-related peptides [6]. It has a more limited distribution in the
periphery, where it is found in smooth muscle and secretory glands.

GASTRINR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
gastrin (CCKB) receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the gastrin receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie
at the N-terminus; motif 3 spans the first external loop; motif 4 spans the
second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 5 and 6 span the second external loop;
motifs 7 and 8 spans the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 9 lies at the
C-terminus. Two iterations on OWL28.0 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are either gastrin fragments,
or members of the cholecystokinin type A receptor family.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 7 sequences, and 6
partial matches.
