ALPHAAMYLASE
O-Glycosyl hydrolases (EC 3.2.1.-) are a widespread group of enzymes that
hydrolyse the glycosidic bond between two or more carbohydrates, or between
a carbohydrate and a non-carbohydrate moiety. A classification system for
glycosyl hydrolases, based on sequence similarity, has led to the definition
of up to 60 different families [1-4] (http://expasy.hcuge.ch/cgi-bin/lists?
glycosid.txt). Family 57 encompases the alpha-amylases (EC 3.2.1.1).

Alpha-amylases are 1,4-alpha-D-glucan glucanohydrolases, which degrade 
both the branched and unbranched forms of starch by cleaving the internal
alpha-1,4 bonds connecting the glucose monomers. The products of these
reactions are maltose and maltotriose, which are further degraded to glucose
by maltases. One atom of calcium is required to bind to each protein
molecule to allow it to function, but excess calcium can inhibit activity 
by binding to amino acids that are required for the catalytic activity 
of the enzyme.

ALPHAAMYLASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for alpha-
amylase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 6
sequences (after J.C. Rogers [5]): the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the first two-thirds of the alignment. Three iterations
on OWL11.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 44 sequences was identified. Of these, all but 3 were alpha-
amylases: AMT4_PSEST and AMT4_PSESA are maltotetrahydrolases, which cleave 
the alpha-1,4 bonds between adjacent glucose monomers of maltotetrose, and 
thus perform similar roles to alpha-amylases; and AMT6_BACS7 is a glucan-1,
4-alpha-maltohexaosidase, which cleaves amylaceous polysaccharides in such 
a way as to yield maltohexaose, a molecule consisting of 6 glucose monomers
joined by alpha-1,4 bonds. 

Motifs 2, 3 and 5 are good discriminators for all alpha-amylases and 
related proteins, such as maltases and cyclomaltodextrin glucanotrans-
ferases, which also digest alpha-1,4 bonds between connected glucose 
monomers in either starch (CDGTases) or smaller molecules such as maltose 
(maltases). Motifs 1 and 4 appear to discriminate between the alpha-amylases
and the subfamily of related proteins that make only partial matches.

Computer modelling studies have shown that the 5 motifs surround the active
site, suggesting that they may be required for the activity of the protein
(M.E.Beck, unpublished data). This hypothesis has been strengthened by 2
studies: the first shows that of the 18 residues thought to be required for
enzymic activity, 11 are contained within the 5 motifs [7]; the second
shows that excess calcium acts as an inhibitor by binding to some of the
residues contained in the motifs believed to have catalytic functions [8].

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 102 sequences, and 99
partial matches.
