CLATHRINADPT
Clathrin-coated pits and vesicles originate from the plasma membrane and 
the trans-Golgi, and mediate the trafficking of proteins to and from the
membranes [1]. The different vesicle types transport different proteins:
plasma membrane vesicles are involved in the endocytosis of membrane
proteins, such as LDL and EGF receptors; and trans-Golgi vesicles are
involved in protein sorting and regulated secretion. The main components
of the pits are clathrin, and the clathrin-associated protein complex, AP,
(also known as assembly or adaptor proteins) [1,2]. Both trans-Golgi
adaptor proteins, AP-1, and plasma membrane adaptor proteins, AP-2, are
heterotetramers that consist of 2 large chains (beta' and gamma in AP-1,
and alpha and beta in AP-2); a medium chain (AP47 in AP-1, and AP50 in
AP-2); and a small chain (AP19 in AP-1, and AP17 in AP-2).

The adaptor complexes are believed to couple clathrin lattices with 
particular membrane proteins by interacting with their cytoplasmic tails,
leading to their selection and concentration: the medium chains regulate
this process by self-phosphorylation via a mechanism that is still unclear
[2]. The medium chains possess a highly conserved N-terminal domain of
around 230 amino acids, which may be the region of interaction with other
AP proteins; a linker region of between 10 and 42 amino acids; and a less
well-conserved C-terminal domain of around 190 amino acids, which may be
the site of specific interaction with the protein being transported
in the vesicle [2].

CLATHRINADPT is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
medium chain of the clathrin-associated protein complex. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: motifs 1-3 were drawn
from conserved regions in the N-terminal half of the protein, and motifs
4-6 from the C-terminal portion - motifs 2 and 4 include the regions
encoded by PROSITE patterns CLAT_ADAPTOR_M_1 (PS00990) and CLAT_ADAPTOR_M_2
(PS00991). Two iterations on OWL24.0 were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified. Four partial
matches were also found, all of which fail to make significant matches with
motifs 1, 5 and 6.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences, and 12
partial matches.
