TPI2FAMILY
Topoisomerases catalyse the interconversion of topological isomers of DNA
and play a key role in DNA metabolism [1]. Topoisomerase I catalyses an ATP-
independent reaction, while topoisomerase II catalyses an ATP-dependent
reaction, resulting in the formation of DNA supercoils [1-3]. The supercoil
is formed by transient cleavage in both strands of double-stranded DNA,
followed by the passage of a segment of DNA through the break, and break
ligation [3]. Eukaryotic enzymes can form both positive and negative
supercoils, while prokaryotic enzymes form only negative supercoils.

Eukaryotic topoisomerase II exists as a homodimer; in bacteriophage T4 it 
consists of 3 heterologous subunits; in prokaryotes it exists as a tetramer
of 2 subunits (2 each of gyrA and gyrB); and in E.coli, a second type II
topoisomerase, involved in chromosome segregation (topoisomerase IV),
consists of 2 subunits (parC and parE). GyrB, parE, and the product of 
bacteriophage T4 gene 39, are all similar to the eukaryotic proteins [1-3].

Structural studies of E.coli topoisomerase II have shown that the enzyme
binds to DNA, forming a complex in which a DNA strand of approximately 120
base pairs is wound around a protein core [3]. At low resolution, this
complex resembles a flattened sphere, and may be heart-shaped, with the DNA
embedded in the protein. There is evidence for channels or cavities in
the complex, which may have a role in the DNA translocation process [3].

The gyrB protein possesses 2 uniquely-folded domains. The N-terminal domain
(domain 1) possesses ATP-binding and hydrolysis functions, and forms an
8-stranded anti-parallel beta-sheet with unusual strand connectivities - the
structure, which is stabilised by a hydrophobic core, can be subdivided
into 6- and 2-stranded anti-parallel sheets, connected by a parallel sheet
[3]. The C-terminal domain (domain 2) contains a 4-stranded mixed parallel
and anti-parallel beta-sheet. Four helices are also present, 2 of which are
rich in arginine residues. The gyrB dimer is punctured by a 20A hole, which
may provide a gateway through which DNA is passed during supercoiling [3].
Every arginine of domain 2 protrudes into this hole, possibly creating a 
DNA-binding surface [3].

From this structural information and results of various biochemical studies,
a possible mechanism has been proposed: DNA is first bound by the gyrB
dimer, then cleaved by gyrA. A large conformational change allows passage
of another DNA strand through the double-stranded break and into the protein
complex. This may involve ATP binding, exploiting the energy of association
of ATP to the complex to stabilise an unfavourable protein conformation.
The DNA break is then repaired by ligation, and the whole DNA molecule
released - this possibly involves hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and organic
phosphorous, which can dissociate from the protein, allowing the protein
complex to return to its favoured conformation, and releasing the DNA [3].

TPI2FAMILY is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the type
II DNA topoisomerase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full length of the gyrB domain - motif 5 includes the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern TOPOISOMERASE_II (PS0177), which contains
a well-conserved pentapeptide. Two iterations on OWL26.3 were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 47 sequences was
identified. Fifteen partial matches were also found, all of which were
topoisomerase II fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 82 sequences, and 7
partial matches.
