GPCRMGR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The metabotropic glutamate receptors are functionally and pharmacologically
distinct from the ionotropic glutamate receptors. They are coupled to G-
proteins and stimulate the inositol phosphate/Ca2+ intracellular signalling 
pathway [2-5]. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain high
proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
and receptors and the rhodopsin-type family: the metabotropic glutamate
receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM' signature. This 7TM signature is 
also shared by the calcium-sensing receptors [6].

At least eight sub-types of metabotropic receptor (MGR1-8) have been 
identified in cloning studies. The sub-types differ in their agonist 
pharmacology and signal transduction pathways [6].

GPCRMGR is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
metabotropic glutamate-type receptor family. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 30 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the full alignment length - motifs 1-7 lie in
the N-terminal extracellular domain; and motifs 8-12 encode putative TM 
domains 2-6 respectively. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 37 sequences was
identified. Numerous partial matches were also found, the majority of which 
are C-terminal fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 32 sequences, and 20
partial matches.
