THYROLIBRINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Thyrotrophin-releasing hormone (thyroliberin) (TRH) stimulates synthesis
and release of thyroid-stimulating hormone in the anterior pituitary [6].
It also stimulates synthesis and release of prolactin. In the CNS, TRH 
stimulates a number of behavioural and pharmacological actions, including
increased turnover of catecholamines in the nucleus accumbens [6]. TRH
receptors are found in high levels in the anterior pituitary, and are also
found in the retina and in certain areas of the brain [6]. The receptors
activate phosphoinositide metabolism through a pertussis-toxin-insensitive
G protein, probably of the Gq/G11 class [6].

THYROLIBRINR is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
thyrotrophin-releasing hormone receptors. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the
alignment that characterise the TRH receptors but distinguish them from
the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 span the
N-terminus; motif 3 spans the first external loop; motif 4 spans the second
external loop; motif 5 lies in the second external loop; motif 6 lies at
the N-terminus of TM domain 5; motifs 7 and 8 lie in the third cytoplasmic
loop; motif 9 lies in the third external loop; and motifs 10 and 11 lie at
the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL29.4 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
