GPROTEINAS
Guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) are a family of membrane-
associated proteins that couple extracellularly-activated integral-membrane
receptors to intracellular effectors, such as ion channels and enzymes that
vary the concentration of second messenger molecules [1-3]. G proteins are
composed of 3 subunits (alpha, beta and gamma) which, in the resting state,
associate as a trimer at the inner face of the plasma membrane. The alpha
subunit has a molecule of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound to it:
stimulation of the G protein by an activated receptor leads to its exchange
for GTP (guanosine triphosphate). This results in the separation of the
alpha from the beta and gamma subunits, which always remain tightly
associated as a dimer. Both the alpha and beta-gamma subunits are then able
to interact with effectors, either individually or in a cooperative manner.
The intrinsic GTPase activity of the alpha subunit hydrolyses the bound GTP
to GDP. This returns the alpha subunit to its inactive conformation and
allows it to reassociate with the beta-gamma subunit, thus restoring the
system to its resting state.

G protein alpha subunits are 350-400 amino acids in length and have
molecular weights in the range 40-45 kDa. Seventeen distinct types of
alpha subunit have been identified in mammals. These fall into 4 main 
groups on the basis of both sequence similarity and function: alpha-S,
alpha-Q, alpha-I and alpha-12 [3]. Many alpha subunits are substrates for
ADP-ribosylation by cholera or pertussis toxins. They are often N-terminally
acylated, usually with myristate and/or palmitoylate, and these fatty acid
modifications are probably important for membrane association and high-
affinity interactions with other proteins. The atomic structure of the
alpha subunit of the G protein involved in mammalian vision, transducin,
has been elucidated in both GTP- and GDB-bound forms, and shows considerable
similarity in both primary and tertiary structure in the nucleotide-binding
regions to other G proteins, such as p21-ras and EF-Tu.

The G protein alpha-S class couple receptors, such as the beta-adrenergic
receptor, to the effector enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which produces the
intracellular second messenger cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP).
Alpha-S is found in a variety of tissues in 4 different splice forms (1-4),
the difference caused by the inclusion or deletion of 15 or 16 residues
after the 71st amino acid - the only observed functional change is a higher
rate of GDP dissociation in the longer variants. Alpha-olf is a specialised
form of alpha-S expressed in olfactory neuroepithelial cells, brain and
pancreas. In addition to its interaction with adenylyl cyclase, alpha-S
also activates ion channels, such as atrial voltage gated sodium channels
and dihydropyridine-sensitive calcium channels in skeletal muscle.

GPROTEINAS is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
G protein alpha subunit group S. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise group S alpha subunits but distinguish them from other
G protein alpha subtypes. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 17 sequences was
identified. Five partial matches were also found: O18678 and O44744 are
C.elegans alpha-S proteins that lack significant matches with motifs 2 and
3; the remaining matches are human alpha-S proteins that lack the N-terminal
portions of their sequences.
