TYRKINASE
Protein kinases comprise a large family of enzymes that mediate the 
response of eukaryotic cells to external stimuli by phosphorylation of 
hydroxyamino acids. The enzymes fall into 2 broad classes, characterised 
with respect to substrate specificity: serine/threonine (S/T) specific and 
tyrosine specific. Tyrosine phosphorylating activity was originally 
detected in 2 viral transforming proteins [2], but many retroviral 
transforming proteins and their cellular counterparts have since been 
shown to possess such activity. The growth factor receptors, which are
activated by ligand binding, are also family members. 

The size of the catalytic domain of these enzymes varies from 250 to 300 
amino acid residues. Its location is not fixed within the protein: in most 
enzymes it lies towards the C-terminus, the N-terminus being devoted to a 
regulatory role. The catalytic domains are not conserved uniformly, but
consist of alternating regions of high and low conservation. Eleven
major conserved subdomains are evident [1]: these must be important for 
catalytic function, either directly as components of the active site, or 
indirectly by contributing to the formation of the active site through 
constraints imposed on secondary structure. The non-conserved regions are 
likely to occur in loop structures, where folding allows the essential 
conserved regions to come together. The central core of the catalytic 
domain, the region with the greatest frequency of highly conserved 
residues, is found in subdomains VI to IX. The invariant or nearly 
invariant residues in subdomain VI (Asp 166 and Asn 171) and subdomain VII 
(Asp 184, Phe 185 and Gly 186) have all been implicated in ATP binding.

Subdomains VI and VIII are of interest in that they contain residues that 
are specifically conserved in either the S/T or the tyrosine kinases, and 
may play a role in recognition of the correct hydroxyamino acid. The most 
striking indicator of amino acid specificity is found in subdomain VI. The 
consensus DLRAAN or DLAARN found in this region is a strong indicator of 
tyrosine specificity, whereas the consensus DLKPEN is a strong indicator of
S/T specificity. Similarly, in subdomain VIII is found the well conserved
tyrosine-specific consensus PI/VK/RWT/MAPE, or the more poorly conserved 
S/T-specific consensus GT/SXXY/FXAPE.

TYRKINASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
catalytic domain of tyrosine kinases, distinguishing it from that of S/T 
kinases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7 
sequences (after Hanks et al. [1]): the motifs correspond to subdomains V,
VI, VIII, IX (cf. PROSITE pattern PROTEIN_KINASE_TYR (PS00109)) and XI
respectively [1]. Three iterations on OWL11.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 146 sequences was
identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 291 sequences, and 220
partial matches.
