GP91PHOX
Phagocytes form the first line of defence against invasion by micro-
organisms. Engulfing of bacteria by neutrophils is accompanied by the
consumption of large amounts of oxygen - a so-called respiratory burst.
Defects in phagocytosis involving the lack of a respiratory burst give
rise to chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), in which patients are pre-
disposed to infection, often from otherwise non-pathogenic bacteria [1].

Regulation of the respiratory burst takes place at the phagocytic vacuole.
The process is mediated by NADPH oxidase, which transports electrons across
the plasma membrane to form superoxide (an oxygen molecule with an extra
electron that is toxic to normal cells) in the vacuole interior. The
electrons are carried across the membrane by a short electron transport
chain in the form of an unusual flavocytochrome b [1].

The flavoprotein comprises 2 subunits, p21phox and gp91phox. Gp91phox
has 2 major domains: an N-terminal, hydrophobic domain with a number of
putative transmembrane helices that could associate to form a barrel-like
pore in the membrane [1]; and a more hydrophilic C-terminal domain, which
probably lies on the cytosolic side of the membrane, capping the trans-
membrane structure [1]. The C-terminal domain is similar to a number of
electron-transport proteins, one of which (ferredoxin-NADP reductase)
has provided a structural framework upon which to model this domain [2].

Around two thirds of individuals with CGD inherit the disease in an
X-linked, recessive manner. The gene responsible for X-linked CGD is that
coding for the large subunit of flavocytochrome b, gp91phox.

GP91PHOX is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cytochrome b-245 heavy chain (gp91phox). The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length, motifs 1-3 lying in the 
N-terminal domain and motifs 4-6 spanning the C-terminal nucleotide-
binding domain. A single iteration on OWL27.1 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Several partial matches were also found, all of which are proteins known
to contain nucleotide-binding domains. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences, and 10
partial matches.
