PGMPMM
Phosphoglucomutase (PGM) is responsible for the conversion of D-glucose
1-phosphate to D-glucose 6-phosphate. The enzyme participates in both the
breakdown and synthesis of glucose [1]. Phosphomannomutase (PMM) is
involved in the conversion of D-mannose 1-phosphate to D-mannose
6-phosphate. The enzyme is required for different biosynthetic pathways
in bacteria. In enterobacteria, 2 different genes code for PMM: rfbK,
which is involved in the synthesis of the O antigen of lipopolysaccharide;
and cpsG, which is required for the synthesis of the M antigen capsular
polysaccharide [2]. In P.aeruginosa (gene algC), PMM is involved in the
biosynthesis of the alginate layer [3], and in X.campestris (gene xanA),
it is involved in the biosynthesis of xanthan.

The catalytic mechanism of both PGM and PMM involves the formation of a
phosphoserine intermediate [1]. Residues around the active site serine are
well conserved and can be used to characterise a wider PGM/PMM family,
which includes the urease operon ureC protein from H.pylori, E.coli mrsA
protein, P.tetraurelia parafusin (a phosphoglycoprotein involved in
exocytosis), and Methanococcus vannielii hypothetical protein in the
3' region of the gene for ribosomal protein S10.

PGMPMM is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
phosphogluco- and phosphomannomutase family. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were
drawn from short conserved regions towards the central portion of the
alignment, motif 1 including the region described by PROSITE pattern
PGM_PMM (PS00710), which includes the active site serine. Three
iterations on OWL28.0 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 28 sequences was identified. Numerous
partial matches were also found, all of which are family members that
fail to make significant matches with one or more motifs. Note: this is 
a highly divergent family, hence the relatively poor diagnositic 
performance of the fingerprint - nevertheless, it may be useful as a guide.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 48 sequences, and 37
partial matches.
