HEMAGGLUTN12
The haemagglutinin (HA) glycoprotein of influenza is a trimer containing 
three structurally distinct regions: a globular head of anti-parallel 
beta-sheet, which contains the receptor binding site and the variable
antigenic determinants (antigenic variation in haemagglutinin is
associated with recurrent epidemics of respiratory diseases in man); a
triple-stranded, coiled-coil, alpha-helical stalk; and a globular foot of
anti-parallel beta-sheet [1-4]. 

The structural domains of haemagglutinin are arranged broadly as follows:
a large globular, hydrophilic, carbohydrate-containing domain resides on 
the external suface of the membrane; a small, uncharged hydrophobic peptide
spans the membrane; and a smaller globular, hydrophilic domain resides on
the inside of the membrane. Each monomer in the structure comprises two
disulphide-linked chains, HA1 and HA2. The N-terminus of HA1 provides a 
central strand in the 5-stranded globular foot, the chain then making its
way to the globular head, where it forms an 8-stranded Swiss-roll. HA2
provides two alpha-helices, which form part of the fibrous structure
(three helices, one from each monomer, pack together as the triple-stranded
coiled-coil that stablises the trimer), its C-terminus providing the
remaining strands of the 5-stranded globular foot.

HEMAGGLUTN12 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
sequences bearing both haemagglutinin HA1 and HA2 chains. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: motifs 1-3 correspond
to elements 1, 7 and 8 of the HA1 fingerprint (see HEMAGGLUTN1); and motifs
4-6 correspond to elements 1, 2 and 4 of the HA2 fingerprint (see
HEMAGGLUTN2). Two iterations on OWL23.0 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 141 sequences was identified. Numerous
partial matches were also found, corresponding to sequences bearing either
the HA1 or the HA2 chain, but not both. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 173 sequences, and 20
partial matches.
