PRION
Prion protein (PrP) is a small glycoprotein found in high quantity in the 
brain of animals infected with certain degenerative neurological diseases,
such as sheep scrapie and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), and the
human dementias Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease (CJD) and Gerstmann-Straussler 
syndrome (GSS). PrP is encoded in the host genome and is expressed both in 
normal and infected cells. During infection, however, the PrP molecules 
become altered and polymerise, yielding fibrils of modified PrP protein.

PrP molecules have been found on the outer surface of plasma membranes of
nerve cells, to which they are anchored through a covalent-linked
glycolipid, suggesting a role as a membrane receptor. PrP is also expressed
in other tissues, indicating that it may have different functions depending
on its location. 

The primary sequences of PrP's from different sources are highly similar: 
all bear an N-terminal domain containing multiple tandem repeats of a 
Pro/Gly rich octapeptide; sites of Asn-linked glycosylation; an essential 
disulphide bond; and 3 hydrophobic segments. These sequences show some 
similarity to a chicken glycoprotein, thought to be an acetylcholine 
receptor-inducing activity (ARIA) molecule. It has been suggested that 
changes in the octapeptide repeat region may indicate a predisposition to 
disease, but it is not known for certain whether the repeat can 
meaningfully be used as a fingerprint to indicate susceptibility.

PRION is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the prion
proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, including the 3 hydrophobic domains and the
octapeptide repeats (WGQPHGGG). Two iterations on OWL18.0 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found: these include a
fragment (PRIO_RAT) lacking part of the sequence bearing the first motif,
and the PrP homologue found in chicken - this matches well with only 2 of
the 3 hydrophobic motifs (1 and 5) and one of the other conserved regions
(6), but has an N-terminal signature based on a sextapeptide repeat
(YPHNPG) rather than the characteristic PrP octapeptide.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 37 sequences, and 1
partial match.
