HBGFFGF
The heparin-binding growth factor (HBGF) family consists of at least 7
related proteins (HBGF1 - HBGF7) that bind to 3 different receptors and
have a strong affinity for heparin. This family is a member of a super-
family that also contains the interleukin-1 proteins, Kunitz-type soybean 
trypsin inhibitors (STI) and histactophilin. All have very similar 
structures, but although the HBGF and interleukin-1 families share some 
sequence similarity (about 25% [1]), they show none at all to the STIs.

HBGFs are involved in many different processes related to cell differen-
tiation and growth control [1]. HBGF1 and HBGF2 have similar effects: they 
induce mesoderm formation in embryogenesis, and mediate wound repair, 
angiogenesis and neural outgrowth; they also induce proliferation and 
migration of fibroblasts, endothelial cells and astroglial cells. HBGF3 
(int-2) and HBGF4 (hst/ks) are known oncogenes, from stomach tumours and 
Kaposi sarcoma respectively. HBGF5 and HBGF6 are also oncogene products. 
HBGF7, keratinocyte growth factor, is possibly the major paracrine
effector of normal epithelial cell proliferation.

The crystal structures of HBGF1 (also known as acidic fibroblast growth
factor, aFGF, and FGF1) and HBGF2 (also known as basic fibroblast growth
factor, bFGF, and FGF2) [2] have been solved, showing them to have the same
12-stranded beta-sheet structure as both interleukin-1 and the Kunitz-type
soybean trypsin inhibitors [4]; HBGF1 and interleukin-1 had been found to 
be similar, and they were predicted to have similar structures [3]. The 
beta-sheets are arranged in 3 similar lobes around a central axis, 6 
strands forming an anti-parallel beta-barrel. Several regions of HBGF1 have 
been implicated in receptor binding, notably beta-strands 1-3, and the 
loop between strands 8 and 9. The loop between strands 10 and 11 is thought
to be involved in binding heparin.  

HBGFFGF is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
HBGF family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3
sequences, the motifs all being drawn from beta-sheet regions, which are
generally more conserved than the loops between them: motif 1 spans strands
1 and 2; motif 2 strands 4 and 5; motif 3 strands 6 and 7; and motif 4
strands 8 and 9. Motifs 1 and 4 were of particular interest, since these
encode the strands implicated in receptor binding. Three iterations on 
OWL17.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point all known
members of the HBGF family were identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 45 sequences, and 10
partial matches.
