UROTENSIN2R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Urotensin II is a vasoactive 'somatostatin-like' peptide, first identified 
in fish spinal cord but later found in humans and other mammals [7]. A 
cyclic hexapeptide region of the molecule is responsible for the biological 
activity and is absolutely conserved between species [8]. Urotensin II is 
the most potent mammalian vasoconstrictor identified to date and causes 
contraction of arterial blood vessels, including the thoracic aorta [7,8]. 
The urotensin II receptor was originally isolated as an orphan receptor, 
expressed in neural and sensory tissues and named GPR14, or sensory 
epithelial neuropeptide-like receptor (SENR) [6]. The receptor has been 
found to be expressed in the CNS (cerebellum and spinal cord), skeletal 
muscle, pancreas, heart, endothelium and vascular smooth muscle [9]. It is 
likely to be involved in the pathophysiological control of cardiovascular 
function and may also influence CNS and endocrine functions [7,9]. Binding 
of urotensin II to the receptor leads to activation of phospholipase C, 
through coupling to Gq/11 family proteins [8]. The resulting increase in 
intracellular calcium may cause the contraction of vascular smooth muscle 
[8].

UROTENSIN2R is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
urotensin II receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections 
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas 
of the alignment that characterise the urotensin II receptors but 
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 
1-3 span the N-terminus; motif 4 spans the first external loop; motif 5 
spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 6 lies in the second external 
loop; motif 7 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 8 lies at the 
C-terminus of TM domain 7; and motif 9 resides at the C-terminus. A single
iteration on SPTR39_15f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
