VASOPRSNV2R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Vasopressin and oxytocin are members of the neurohypophyseal hormone family
found in all mammalian species [6]. They are present in high levels in the
posterior pituitary. Vasopressin has an essential role in the control of 
the water content of the body, acting in the kidney to increase water and
sodium absorption [6]. In higher concentrations, vasopressin stimulates
contraction of vascular smooth muscle, stimulates glycogen breakdown in the
liver, induces platelet activation, and evokes release of corticotrophin 
from the anterior pituitary [6]. Vasopressin and its analogues are used
clinically to treat diabetes insipidus [6]. 

The V2 receptor is found in high levels in the osmoregulatory epithelia of
the terminal urinary tract, where it stimulates water reabsorption [6]. It
is also present in lower levels in the endothelium and blood vessels of some
species, where it induces vasodilation [6]. In the CNS, binding sites are
found in the subiculum, with lower levels in caudate-putamen and islands 
of Calleja [6]. The receptor is involved in an effector pathway that forms
cAMP through activation of Gs [6].

VASOPRSNV2R is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
vasopressin V2 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved
sections spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those regions
that characterise the vasopressin V2 receptors but distinguish them from
the rest of the vasopressin family - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus; 
motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans the second 
cytoplasmic loop; motifs 5 and 6 span the third cytoplasmic loop; and 
motifs 7 and 8 reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL30.1 was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified
beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences, and 1
partial match.
