GPCRRHODOPSN
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

GPCRRHODOPSN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily [1,2,5]. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 11 opsins: the motifs encode each of the 7 hydro-
phobic, membrane-spanning regions. Six iterations on OWL8.1 were required
to reach convergence, at which point all rhodopsin-like GPCRs in the data-
base were identified (52 in total). In addition, a single partial match was
found, namely A1AB_CANFA, a fragment lacking the portion of sequence
bearing the first 2 motifs.

Updates on subsequent OWL releases have shown a rapid growth in the super-
family. In OWL28.1, the fingerprint identifies a true set comprising 687
sequences, but the situation has grown in complexity, 229 partial matches
also being identified - the total number of true and partial 'hits' is 
thus 916. The partial matches comprise both fragments, which lack motif-
bearing sections of sequence, and complete sequences in which one or more
of the TM motifs are not matched, or at least are matched only poorly.

A large number of partial matches are olfactory receptors, which mostly
fail to match motifs 6, 4 and 2. But increasingly represented in this
category are the prostaglandin and thromboxane receptors, most of which
fail to match motif 5, and the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptors,
which tend not to match well with motif 1. The failure of such sequences 
to match certain motifs arises primarily from the replacement of a number
of vitally conserved residues, usually in the context of other small
changes in neighbouring residues, resulting in slight changes in their
TM signatures.

The diversity of receptors included in the composite database, and the
scale of the family itself, is rendering the task of identifying all
sequences unambiguously rather difficult. It is likely that we may
consider a weighting scheme in future updates to tackle this problem.
We are also deriving further family-specific fingerprints to be used in 
conjunction with that of the superfamily.

The fingerprint does not recognise the pheromone, cAMP, secretin-like or
metabotropic glutamate receptors. It is well-established that these
constitute discrete GPCR families, which can be characterised by their
own unique TM fingerprints (see signatures GPCRSECRETIN, GPCRCAMP, GPCRSTE2
and GPCRMGR, and for example PROSITE patterns PS00649 G_PROTEIN_RECEP_F2_1
and PS00650 G_PROTEIN_RECEP_F2_2). 

An update on SPTR55_38f identified a true set of 2375 sequences, and
numerous partial matches, all of which are superfamily members that
fail to match one or more motifs. A more representative seed alignment
containing 43 sequences has also been developed.
