ZINCFINGER
The zinc finger motif was first discovered in the Xenopus laevis 
transcription factor IIIA, and has since been found to be ubiquitous in 
transcription factors and other DNA-binding proteins. Putative fingers are 
present in the structure of many regulatory proteins, acting as specific 
nucleic acid binding domains. The motif contains a repeated 28 amino acid
sequence, including 2 conserved Cys and 2 conserved His residues in a
C-2-C-12-H-3-H type motif. The 12 residues separating the second Cys and 
the first His are, in the main, polar and basic, implicating this region in
particular in nucleic acid binding. By contrast, the hormone-regulated 
proteins contain a C4 motif rather than a C2H2 motif, and contain only 2 
repeats, rather than the multiple tandem repeats found within the former.

The zinc finger motif is an unusually small, self-folding domain in which 
Zn is a crucial component of its tertiary structure: all bind 1 atom of Zn 
in a tetrahedral array to yield a finger-like projection, which interacts 
with nucleotides in the major groove of the nucleic acid - the Zn binds to 
the conserved Cys and His residues. Fingers have been found to bind to 
about 5 base pairs of nucleic acid containing short runs of guanine 
residues. They are found in all transcription factors, and also proteins 
such as RNA and DNA polymerases. This ability to bind to both RNA and DNA 
suggests versatility not demonstrated by the helix-turn-helix motif: the
zinc finger may thus represent the original nucleic acid binding protein. It
has also been suggested that a Zn-centred domain could be used in a protein 
interaction, e.g. in protein kinase C.

ZINCFINGER is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
C2H2 zinc fingers. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 5 sequences: the motifs span the full length of the finger domain (cf.
PROSITE pattern ZINC_FINGER_C2H2 (PS00028)). Four iterations on OWL11.0
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 155
sequences was identified (several false-positive matches were also picked
up because the fingerprint contains only 2 motifs and sequence identity is
low). 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 576 sequences.
