CPSASE
Carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase (CPSase) is an enzyme of special interest,
being common to both the arginine and pyrimidine biosynthetic pathways: it
thus raises the problem of how to regulate pyrimidine and arginine 
biosynthesis separately. CPSase catalyses the production of carbamoyl-
phosphate from its precursors, the precursors depending on the pathway 
involved: in pyrimidine biosynthesis the nitrogen donor is glutamate, the 
other precursors being ATP and hydrogen carbonate; in arginine biosynthesis
the precursors are carbon dioxide and an ammonium ion.

E.coli and other bacteria possess only one CPSase enzyme, which produces
carbamoyl-phosphate for both pathways and has 2 subunits coded for by the 
genes carA and carB: carA codes for the small subunit, which has glutamine 
amidotransferase (GATase) activity, and carB codes for the large subunit, 
which has CPSase activity. These 2 genes are genetically linked as the 
carAB operon, which is differentially regulated at 2 tandem promoters 
during transcription by both arginine and UMP, while ornithine stimulates
activity.

Eukaryotes possess 2 different CPSase enzymes, one for each pathway, both
of which are comparmentalised and regulated separately. Pyrimidine
biosynthesis occurs in the cytosol where glutamine is the nitrogen donor,
and arginine biosynthesis (the urea cycle) occurs in the mitochondria where
ammonium ions are the nitrogen donors, with N-acetylglutamine acting as an 
allosteric activator. The arginine-specific CPSase catalyses the same 
overall reaction and has the same structure as the prokaryotic enzyme, yet
in S.cerevisiae the 2 genes, CPA1 and CPA2, are unlinked. In this organism,
the gene URA2 codes for the glutamine-dependent carbamoylphosphate
synthetase and the ATCase for the pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway. 

Two main CPSases have been identified in mammals: CPSase I is mitochondrial,
it is found in high levels in the liver and is involved in arginine bio-
synthesis; CPSase II is cytosolic, it is associated with aspartate
carbamoyltransferase (ATCase) and dihydroorotase (DHOase) and is involved
in pyrimidine biosynthesis. In the pyrimidine pathway in most eukaryotes, 
CPSase is found as a domain in a multi-functional protein, which also has 
GATase, ACTase and DHOase activity.

CPSASE is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
carbamoyl-phosphate synthase CPSase domain. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: motifs 3 and 6 include regions
encoded by PROSITE patterns CPSASE_1 (PS00866) and CPSASE_2 (PS00867).
Two iterations on OWL18.0 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 9 sequences was identified. Three partial
matches were also found: PYR1_DICDI is a fusion protein containing
glutamine-dependent CPsase-, ATCase- and DHOase-activity, but the CPSase
region is incomplete; CARB_METBA is a fragment of the large chain of the
CPSase protein from Methanosacina barkeri; SCURA2 is a fragment of a yeast
protein that has been translated from the 5'-region of the URA2 gene for
carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase and lacks the portion of sequence bearing
the last 5 motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 41 sequences, and 1
partial match.
