BETAHAEM
Globins are haem-containing proteins involved in dioxygen binding and/or 
transport [1]. Hundreds of globin sequences are known [2]. It has been 
proposed that all globins have evolved from a family of ancestral, ~17kDa 
haemoproteins that displayed the globin fold and functioned as redox 
proteins [3]. The globin superfamily includes vertebrate haemoglobins (Hb); 
vertebrate myoglobins (Mb); invertebrate globins; plant leghaemoglobins; and 
bacterial flavohaemoglobins. 

The function of vertebrate haemoglobins (Hb) is transport of dioxygen in
blood plasma. Hb binds O(2) in the reduced [Fe(II)] state. The Hb molecule 
exists as a tetramer, typically of two alpha- and two beta-globin chains, 
which form a well-defined quaternary structure. Each monomer binds iron 
protoporphyrin IX (haem). 

The 3D structures of a great number of haemoglobins in various states
are known. The protein is largely alpha-helical, eight conserved helices 
(A to H) providing the scaffold for a well-defined haem-binding pocket
(Hb alpha subunits lack helix D [4]). The imidazole ring of the "proximal"
His residue provides the fifth haem iron ligand; the other axial haem iron 
position remains essentially free for O(2) coordination. Conserved "distal"
His and Val residues block an unhindered access to the sixth coordination 
site so that a controlled binding of small molecules may result only as a 
consequence of side-chain dynamics of the protein [1]. O(2) binding results
in a transition from high-spin to low-spin iron, with accompanying changes 
in the Fe-N bond lengths and coordination geometry. In Hb, these subtle 
changes lead to the well-known cooperative effect. On the quaternary 
structure level, O(2) binding induces relative reorientation of the 
[alpha-1, beta-1] and [alpha-2, beta-2] dimers. 

Alpha- and beta-haemoglobins are highly similar; the sequence of beta-
differs in length from that of alpha-haemoglobin on average by 5 residues
(actual lengths 146 and 141 residues respectively). The major structural
difference between alpha- and beta-forms is that beta-haemoglobins contain
an alpha-helix (the D helix) that is missing in alpha-forms.

BETAHAEM is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for beta-
haemoglobins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 
10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved sections spanning
the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that characterise the 
beta-haemoglobins but distinguish them from the rest of the globin family - 
motif 1 spans the C-terminal half of helix 2 and helices 3 and 4; motif 2
encompasses helix 5 and the N-terminus of helix 6, the region that marks a
significant structural difference between the alpha- and beta-Hbs; motif 3
spans the C-terminus of helix 6 and the N-terminus of helix 7; motif 4 lies
in the loop between helices 7 and 8; and motif 5 encodes most of helix 10.
Five iterations on OWL30.1 were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 311 sequences was identified. Numerous partial
matches were also found, some of which are fragments, but many are alpha-Hbs
that match 2 or 3 motifs. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 294 sequences, and 105
partial matches.
