RIESKE
Ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase (bc1 complex or complex III) is an enzyme
complex of bacterial and mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation systems
[1]: it catalyses the oxidoreduction of the mobile redox components
ubiquinol and cytochrome c, generating an electrochemical potential, which
is linked to ATP synthesis [2]. The complex consists of 3 subunits in most
bacteria, and 9 in mitochondria: both bacterial and mitochondrial complexes
contain cytochrome b and cytocrhome c1 subunits, and an iron-sulphur
'Rieske' subunit, which contains a high potential 2Fe-2S cluster [3]. The
mitochondrial form also includes 6 other subunits that do not possess redox
centres [1].

Plastoquinone-plastocyanin reductase (b6f complex), present in cyanobacteria
and the chloroplasts of plants, catalyses the oxidoreduction of plastoquinol
and cytochrome f. This complex, which is functionally similar to ubiquinol-
cytochrome c reductase, comprises cytochrome b6, cytochrome f and Rieske
subunits [4].

The Rieske subunit acts by binding either a ubiquinol or plastoquinol
anion, transferring an electron to the 2Fe-2S cluster, then releasing the
electron to the cytochrome c or cytochrome f haem iron [1,4]. The 2Fe-2S
cluster is bound in the highly conserved C-terminal region of the Rieske
subunit, where there are 4 Cys and 2 His residues, some of which take part
in the binding process.

RIESKE is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for Rieske
subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5
sequences: motifs 1 and 2 include regions encoded by PROSITE patterns
RIESKE_1 (PS00199) and RIESKE_2 (PS00200), each of which contains 1 His and
2 Cys residues (4 of these 6 residues are thought to bind the 2Fe-2S
cluster); motif 3 contains charged residues thought to interact with the
cytochrome subunits of the complex. Two iterations on OWL21.1 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 26 sequences was
identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 40 sequences, and 7
partial matches.
