CDATPASE
Proteins that transport heavy metals in micro-organisms and mammals share
similarities in their sequences and structures. These proteins provide an
important focus for research, some being involved in bacterial resistance
to toxic metals, such as lead and cadmium, while others are involved in
inherited human syndromes, such as Wilson and Menkes diseases [1].

A conserved 30-residue domain has been found in a number of these heavy
metal transport or detoxification proteins [1]. The domain, which has been
termed Heavy-Metal-Associated (HMA), contains two conserved cysteines that
are probably involved in metal binding. 

The HMA domain has been identified in the N-terminal regions of a variety
of cation-transporting ATPases (E1-E2 ATPases): the human copper ATPases 
involved in Menkes and Wilson diseases (ATP7A and ATP7B) each contain 6 
tandem copies; a chromosomal Staphylococcus aureus cadA contains two copies;
and the copper ATPases CCC2 from budding yeast, copA from Enterococcus 
faecalis, synA from Synechococcus, and cadmium ATPases cadA from Bacillus 
firmus and plasmid pI258 from Staphylococcus aureus contain a single copy.
Other ATPases that contain the HMA domain include: fixI from Rhizobium 
meliloti; pacS from Synechococcus strain PCC 7942; Mycobacterium leprae 
ctpA and ctpB; and Escherichia coli hypothetical protein yhhO. In addition,
the domain has been found in bacterial mercuric reductase; the copP copper-
binding protein of Helicobacter pylori; and in bacterial mercuric transport
proteins.

The structure of the mercuric ion-binding protein MerP from Shigella
flexneri has been determined. The fold has been classed as a ferredoxin-like
alpha-beta sandwich, having a beta-alpha beta-beta alpha-beta architecture,
with the two alpha-helices overlaying a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-
sheet [2]. Structural differences between the reduced and mercury-bound 
forms of merP are localised to the metal-binding loop containing the 
consensus sequence GMTCXXC, the two cysteines of which are involved in
bi-coordination of Hg(2+) [2].

Cadmium-transporting ATPase is an integral membrane protein that contains 
a single copy of the HMA domain and is predicted to contain 4 transmembrane
(TM) domains. The protein, which functions as an electroneutral antiporter,
ejecting one Cd(2+) and accumulating two protons via an energy-dependent
efflux mechanism, catalyses the reaction:

		ATP + H(2)O = ADP + orthophosphate

CDATPASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for cadmium-
transporting ATPases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
N-terminal portion of the alignment, motifs 1 and 2 encoding the HMA domain
- motif 1 includes the C-terminal residues of strand 1 and the first metal-
binding cysteine; motif 2 spans helix 1 and strand 2; and motif 3 spans 
strand 3 and helix 2. A single iteration on OWL30.2 was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. 
Three partial matches were found (E70041, LPU494983, F69869), all of which 
are heavy-metal transporting ATPase homologues that match 2 motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 6
partial matches.
