CHAPERONIN60
The assembly of proteins has been thought to be the sole result of 
properties inherent in the primary sequence of polypeptides themselves. 
In some cases, however, structural information from other protein molecules
is required for correct folding and subsequent assembly into oligomers [1].
These 'helper' molecules are referred to as molecular chaperones, a 
subfamily of which are the chaperonins [2], which include 10kDa and 60kDa
proteins. These are required for normal cell growth (as demonstrated 
by the fact that no temperature sensitive mutants for the chaperonin genes 
can be found in the temperature range 20 to 43 degrees centigrade [1]), 
and are stress-induced, acting to stabilise or protect disassembled 
polypeptides under heat-shock conditions [2].

The 10kDa chaperonin (cpn10 - or groES in bacteria) exists as a ring-
shaped oligomer of between 6 to 8 identical subunits, whereas the 60kDa 
chaperonin (cpn60 - or groEL in bacteria) forms a structure comprising 2 
stacked rings, each ring containing 7 identical subunits [1]. These ring 
structures assemble by self-stimulation in the presence of Mg2+-ATP. The 
cpn10 and cpn60 oligomers also require Mg2+-ATP in order to interact to 
form a functional complex, although the mechanism of this interaction is 
as yet unknown [3]. This chaperonin complex is essential for the correct 
folding and assembly of polypeptides into oligomeric structures, of which 
the chaperonins themselves are not a part [2]. The binding of cpn10 to 
cpn60 inhibits the weak ATPase activity of cpn60.

The 60kDa form of chaperonin is the immunodominant antigen of patients
with Legionnaire's disease [4], and is thought to play a role in the
protection of the legionella bacteria from oxygen radicals within macro-
phages. This hypothesis is based on the finding that the cpn60 gene is
upregulated in response to hydrogen peroxide, a source of oxygen radicals.
Cpn60 has also been found to display strong antigenicity in many bacterial
species [5], and has the potential for inducing immune protection against
unrelated bacterial infections. The RuBisCO subunit binding protein (which
has been implicated in the assembly of RuBisCO) and cpn60 have been found 
to be evolutionary homologues, the RuBisCO subunit binding protein having
the C-terminal Gly-Gly-Met repeat found in all bacterial cpn60 sequences.
Although the precise function of this repeat is unknown, it is thought to 
be important as it is also found in 70kDa heat-shock proteins [4]. The
crystal structure of E.coli GroEL has been resolved to 2.8A [6].

CHAPERONIN60 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
60kDa chaperonins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length, motif 5 including the C-terminal region
encoded by PROSITE pattern CHAPERONINS_CPN60 (PS00296), and motif 2
containing a highly-conserved Asp residue (Asp-87 in E.coli GroEL) that is
essential for ATP hydrolysis and polypeptide release [7]. Two iterations on
OWL19.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 51 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found: these include a cpn60 fragment; a RuBisCO binding protein fragment;
and a subfamily of 9 TCP-1 chaperonins [8], which match just 2 motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 142 sequences, and 24
partial matches.
