NEPRILYSIN
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship [1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1].

Previously known as enkephalinase, common acute lymphocytic leukemia antigen
(CALLA) and/or neutral endopeptidase, neprilysin is a plasma membrane-bound 
mammalian enzyme that is able to digest biologically-active peptides, 
including enkephalins [1]. The family includes eukaryote and prokaryote
oligopeptidases, as well as a mammalian blood group antigen Kell [1]. The
zinc ligands of neprilysin are known and are analogous to those in 
thermolysin, a related peptidase [1,2]

Neprilysins, like thermolysin, are inhibited by phosphoramidon, which
appears to selectively inhibit this family in mammals. The enzymes are all
oligopeptidases, digesting oligo- and polypeptides, but not proteins [1].
Neprilysin consists of a short cytoplasmic domain, a membrane-spanning
region and a large extracellular domain. The cytoplasmic domain contains a
conformationally-restrained octapeptide, which is thought to act as a stop
transfer sequence that prevents proteolysis and secretion [1,3]

NEPRILYSIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
neprilysin family (M13) of metalloproteases. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions within the central portion of the alignment - motif 3
includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142),
which contains the HEXXH motif, the histidines of which are zinc ligands
and the glutamate of which is the catalytic residue; motif 4 also contains
a conserved glutamate, which provides the third zinc ligand. Three
iterations on OWL29.3 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 27 sequences was identified. Four partial matches
were also found, all of which are fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 29 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
