RABGDIREP
Rab proteins constitute a family of small GTPases that serve a regulatory
role in vesicular membrane traffic [1,2]; C-terminal geranylgeranylation is
crucial for their membrane association and function. This post-translational
modification is catalysed by Rab geranylgeranyl transferase (Rab-GGTase), a 
multi-subunit enzyme that contains a catalytic heterodimer and an accessory
component, termed Rab escort protein (REP)-1 [1]. REP-1 presents newly-
synthesised Rab proteins to the catalytic component, and forms a stable
complex with the prenylated proteins following the transfer reaction. 

The mechanism of REP-1-mediated membrane association of Rab5 is similar
to that mediated by Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor (GDI). REP-1 and Rab GDI 
also share other functional properties, including the ability to inhibit the
release of GDP and to remove Rab proteins from membranes. 

The crystal structure of the bovine alpha-isoform of Rab GDI has been
determined to a resolution of 1.81A [3]. The protein is composed of two
main structural units: a large complex multi-sheet domain I, and a smaller
alpha-helical domain II.

The structural organisation of domain I is closely related to FAD-containing
monooxygenases and oxidases [3]. Conserved regions common to GDI and the
choroideraemia gene product, which delivers Rab to catalytic subunits of
Rab geranylgeranyltransferase II, are clustered on one face of the domain
[2]. The two most conserved regions form a compact structure at the apex of
the molecule; site-directed mutagenesis has shown these regions to play a
critical role in the binding of Rab proteins [3].

RABGDIREP is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Rab GDI/REP family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
the N-terminal half of the alignment - motif 1 spans strand 1 and helix 1;
motif 2 includes the second strand; motif 3 spans helix 4 and strands 4 and
5; motif 4 spans helices 5 and 6, and strand 6; motif 5 encodes helix 8; 
motif 6 spans the C-terminus of helix 13, helix 14 and strand 8; and motif
7 encompasses helix 15 and strand 9. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 27 sequences was
identified. Three partial matches were also found (YSCMRS6A, GDIA_MOUSE and
A41937), all of which are fragments. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 28 sequences, and 1
partial match.
