BRADYKININR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Bradykinins (BKs) are a family of short, structurally similar peptides that 
activate sensory fibres, contract venous smooth muscle, stimulate release
of cytokines, induce connective tissue proliferation and mediate endo-
thelium-dependent vasodilation [6]. BK antagonists are of potential use
in the treatment of inflammation, asthma, mild pain and endotoxic shock.
BK receptors are widespread in peripheral tissues, and at least 3 different
receptor subtypes have been proposed. Of these, B2 is the predominant
subtype, mediating slow contraction of various smooth muscles (including
veins, intestine, uterus, trachea and lung), inducing endothelium-dependent
relaxation of arteries and arterioles, and stimulating natriuresis/diuresis
in kidney. BK also induces hyperalgesia through activation of B2 receptors
in sensory nerve fibres and dorsal root ganglion neurons [6].

BRADYKININR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the bradykinin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections 
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment 
that characterise the bradykinin receptors but distinguish them from the 
rest of the rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily - motif 1 spans the C-terminus
of TM domain 2, leading into the first external loop; motif 2 spans the
N-terminal portion of TM domain 3; motifs 3 and 4 span the C-terminus of 
TM domain 4 and the second external loop; motif 5 spans the C-terminus of
TM domain 5, leading into the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 6 resides
at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL26.3 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Several partial matches were also found, all of which are superfamily
members that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 10 sequences, and 1
partial match.
