RIBOSOMALL6
Protein synthesis is co-ordinated in all cells by ribosomes, ribonucleo-
protein particles containing more than 50 different proteins and several
large RNAs [1]. Low resolution models show the protein arrangement in both
the large and small ribosomal subunits, but higher resolution structures are
required to reveal the detailed mechanistic functioning of the complex [2].

L6 is a protein from the large (50S) subunit; in E.coli, it is located in
the aminoacyl-tRNA binding site of the peptidyltransferase centre, and is
known to bind directly to 23S rRNA. It belongs to a family of ribosomal
proteins, including L6 from eubacteria, cyanelles (structures that perform
similar functions to chloroplasts, but have structural and biochemical
characteristics of cyanobacteria) and mitochondria. L6 comprises 2 almost
identical folds, suggesting that is was derived by the duplication of an
ancient RNA-binding protein gene [1]. Analysis reveals several sites on the
protein surface where interactions with other ribosome components may
occur, the N-terminus being involved in protein-protein interactions and
the C-terminus containing possible RNA-binding sites [1]. 

RIBOSOMALL6 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for L6
ribosomal proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length, motif 3 including the region encoded
by PROSITE pattern RIBOSOMAL_L6_1 (PS00525), a highly conserved nonapeptide
located in the putative RNA-binding region. Two iterations on OWL24.0 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9
sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found, RL6_THETH
and RM06_MARPO, both of which are fragments. Note that no archaebacterial
L6 or eukaryotic L9 proteins were detected: these are structurally and
functionally related to the L6 family identified, but lack significant
sequence similarity.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 31 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
