ENDOLAPTASE
Proteolytic enzymes that use serine in their catalytic machinery are 
widespread and numerous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes
[1]. They encompass a range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase,
endopeptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase. More than 20 serine
protease families (denoted S1 - S27) have been identified, which have been
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
and functional similarities [1]. Structures from four clans have been
examined (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be unrelated, suggesting at 
least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidase, and possibly many more
[1]. Since that examination, structural representations from the other two 
clan members (SF, SG) have been determined [3].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

Endopeptidase La (Lon) proteins belong to the S16 family of the ATP-dependent
endopeptidase (SG) clan [1,3]. The active site contains a conserved serine
residue, by contrast with the active site of the only other clan member,
ClpP endopeptidase (S16), which contains catalytic serine and histidine
residues [1]. There are no sequence similarities around the active sites of
these two clan members [1]. 

Lon (La) protease was the first ATP-dependent protease to be purified from
E.coli [4-7]. The enzyme is a homotetramer of 87kDa subunits, with one 
proteolytic and one ATP-binding site per monomer, making it structurally
less complex than other known ATP-dependent proteases [5]. Despite this
relative structural simplicity, Lon recognises its substrates directly,
without delegating the task of substrate recognition to other enzymes [5].
By contrast, ClpP endopeptidases are multimeric assemblies of two different
types of subunit, one of which has ATPase activity, and the other has
proteolytic activity [4].

ENDOLAPTASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
endopeptidase La ATP dependent (S14) family of serine proteases. The
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs
were drawn from conserved regions spanning the C-terminal half of the
alignment - motif 1 includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern ATP_GTP_A
(PS00017), which describes the ATP binding site; and motif 3 includes the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern LON_SER (PS01046), which describes the
serine active site. Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 35 sequences was
identified. Three partial matches were also found: S77765 is an endopeptidase
La fragment that matches motifs 4 and 5; LONH_HAEIN lacks the ATP binding
domain, and matches motifs 3 and 4 only; and CEC06C37 is a translated
sequence from the C.elegans genome project that matches motifs 4 and 5.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 39 sequences, and 10
partial matches.
