HISTAMINEH2R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Histamine is distributed within mast cells in all peripheral tissues and
is a well-characterised mediator of inflammation and allergy [6]. It also
regulates release of gastric acid from parietal cells in the gastric
mucosa. H2 receptors are found in high levels in the stomach and heart,
and have limited distribution in smooth muscle and cells of the immune
system. H2 antagonists are used clinically in the treatment of peptic
ulceration [6].

HISTAMINEH2R is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
histamine H2 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the H2 receptors but distinguish them
from the H1 receptors - motif 1 lies in the N-terminal region immediately
preceding TM domain 1; motif 2 spans part of the second external loop
and the N-terminus of TM domain 5; motif 3 lies in the third cytoplasmic
loop; motif 4 spans the third external loop; and motifs 5-7 lie in the
C-terminal region following TM domain 7. A single iteration on OWL27.1 was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
