TRNASYNTHGLU
Appropriate attachment of an amino acid to its cognate tRNA is the key to
faithful translation of the genetic code. The family of enzymes responsible
for this is the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (AATRSs) (EC 6.1.1.-).

AATRSs catalyse a two-step reaction:

(1) Enzyme + amino acid + ATP ---> Enzyme(aminoacyl-AMP) + PPi

(2) tRNA + Enzyme(aminoacyl-AMP) ---> aminoacyl-tRNA + AMP + Enzyme

In the first step, they form an aminoacyl-adenylate, in which the carboxyl
of the amino acid is linked to the alpha-phosphate of ATP, by displacing
the pyrophosphate. When the correct tRNA is bound, the aminoacyl group is
transferred to the 2'- or 3'-terminal OH of the tRNA at the expense of AMP
[1].

Based on structural and sequence comparisons, this group of at least 20
proteins (in prokaryotes there are approximately 20, but in eukaryotes
there are usually 2 forms for each amino acid; namely, the cytosolic and
mitochondrial forms) can be divided into two classes.

Class I AATRSs contain a characteristic Rossman fold and are mostly
monomeric. At the primary structure level, two highly-conserved motifs
are observed, 'HIGH' and 'KMSKS' [2,3]; these are associated with the ATP-
binding site.

Class II AATRSs share an anti-parallel beta-sheet formation, flanked by
alpha-helices [3], and are mostly dimeric or multimeric.

Further distinction between the two classes is evident when the reaction
mechanisms are investigated. In reactions catalysed by the class I AATRSs,
the aminoacyl group is coupled to the 2'-hydroxyl of the tRNA, while, in
class II reactions, the 3'-hydroxyl site is preferred.

Glutamyl-tRNA synthetase (EC 6.1.1.11) is specific to glutamate and belongs
to class I.

TRNASYNTHGLU is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
glutamyl-tRNA synthetases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
within the C-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 spans the loop
between beta-strand 1 and alpha-helix 1, and is characterised by the 'HIGH'
motif encoded by PROSITE pattern AA_TRNA_LIGASE_I (PS00178); motif 2 
includes helix 1; motif 3 spans strand 2; motif 4 includes helix 8, whose 
N-terminus denotes the boundary between domains 1 and 2; and motif 5 spans 
strand 8 and the N-terminus of helix 9. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 36 
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found: most of
those matching three motifs are fragments, but some are glutaminyl-tRNA
synthetases and one is an arginyl-tRNA synthetase.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 40 sequences, and 7
partial matches.
