CHEMTRNSDUCR
Many biological processes depend on the function of proteins that detect
changes in a cell's environment and transmit the information to the 
cytoplasm [1]. In bacteria, such a class of proteins is represented by 
the methyl-accepting chemotaxis transducers, which play a central role 
in mediating chemotactic behaviour [1]. 

The transducers detect changes in the extracellular concentration of a
small number of attractants or repellents (such as serine, maltose, ribose,
etc.), and signal changes to the flagellar apparatus of the cell [1]. The
detection of these changes is facilitated by the methylation of the
transducers at a number of glutamate residues, the level of methylation
depending on the attractant concentration [1]. The proteins appear to
possess the following components: an N-terminal signal sequence that acts
as a transmembrane (TM) domain in the mature protein; a poorly-conserved
periplasmic receptor region; a second TM domain; and a highly-conserved
C-terminal cytoplasmic region [2], which contains the glycosylated
glutamate residues [3].

CHEMTRNSDUCR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial chemotaxis transducers. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 6 sequences: motifs 1 and 3 span the 2 TM domains;
motif 2 corresponds to a conserved region in the periplasmic receptor
region; and motifs 4-7 span highly conserved areas in the C-terminal
cytoplasmic domain - motif 4 includes the region encoded by PROSITE
pattern CHEMOTAXIS_TRANSDUCER (PS00538), in which some of the Glu/Gln
residues undergo reversible methylation. Two iterations on OWL23.2 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found -
these are chemotaxis inducer fragments, or homologues showing only low
levels of similarity to the motifs (most match motifs 4-7).

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 7 sequences, and 78
partial matches.
