SRSVCYSPTASE
Cysteine protease activity is dependent on an active dyad of cysteine and
histidine, the order and spacing of these residues varying in the known 
families. Nearly half of all cysteine proteases are found exclusively
in viruses [1]. Cysteine protease families have been grouped into five 
clans (designated CA, CB, CC, CD and CE) on the basis of structural and
functional similarity. Families C1, C2 and C10, which belong to the CA clan,
have a Cys/His catalytic diad, and are loosely termed papain-like. Families
in the CB clan have a His/Cys diad, and contain enzymes from RNA viruses
distantly related to chymotrypsin. Enzymes in clan CC are also from RNA
viruses, but have a papain like Cys/His active site. The remaining two
clans, CD and CE, contain only one family each [2]. Some families have not
yet been asigned to a clan. 

Two additional clans (PA and PB) have been identified, these containing a
mixture of serine, cysteine and threonine proteases. Clan PA contains a 
catalytically active serine or cysteine nucleophilic residue as part of the
ordered triad His, Asp, Ser (or Cys). Clan PB contains a serine, cysteine or
threonine active residue at the N-terminus of the mature protease [3]. 

Caliciviruses are positive-stranded ssRNA viruses that cause gastroenteritis
[4]. The calicivirus genome contains two open reading frames, ORF1 and ORF2.
ORF1 encodes a non-structural polypeptide, which has RNA helicase, cysteine
protease and RNA polymerase activity [5]. The regions of the polyprotein in 
which these activities lie are similar to proteins produced by the picorna-
viruses [6]. ORF2 encodes a structural, capsid protein. Two different 
families of caliciviruses can be distinguished on the basis of sequence
similarity, namely the Norwalk-like viruses or small round structured 
viruses (SRSVs), and those classed as non-SRSVs. 

Calicivirus proteases from the SRSV group, which are members of the PA
protease clan, constitute family C37 of the cysteine proteases (proteases 
from non-SRSVs belong to the C24 family). As mentioned above, the protease 
activity resides within a polyprotein. The enzyme cleaves the polyprotein 
at sites N-terminal to itself, liberating the polyprotein helicase. 

SRSVCYSPTASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
cysteine protease (C37) of small round structured caliciviruses. The 
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs
were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full length of the poly-
protein protease, focusing on those regions that characterise members of 
the C37 family but distinguish them from the C24 proteases - motif 3 encodes
the active site His residue; and motif 4 includes the catalytic Asp (the Cys
residue is located between motifs 7 and 8). Two iterations on OWL30.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 4 
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences.
