ALPHAHAEM
Globins are haem-containing proteins involved in dioxygen binding and/or 
transport [1]. Hundreds of globin sequences are known [2]. It has been 
proposed that all globins have evolved from a family of ancestral, ~17kDa 
haemoproteins that displayed the globin fold and functioned as redox 
proteins [3]. The globin superfamily includes vertebrate haemoglobins (Hb); 
vertebrate myoglobins (Mb); invertebrate globins; plant leghaemoglobins; and 
bacterial flavohaemoglobins. 

The function of haemoglobins (Hb) is transport of dioxygen in blood plasma.
Hb binds O(2) in the reduced [Fe(II)] state. The Hb molecule exists as a
tetramer, typically of two alpha- and two beta-globin chains, which form 
a well-defined quaternary structure. Each monomer binds iron protoporphyrin
IX (haem). 

The 3D structures of a great number of vertebrate Hbs in various states
are known. The protein is largely alpha-helical, eight conserved helices 
(A to H) providing the scaffold for a well-defined haem-binding pocket
(Hb alpha subunits lack helix D [4]). The imidazole ring of the "proximal"
His residue provides the fifth haem iron ligand; the other axial haem iron 
position remains essentially free for O(2) coordination. Conserved "distal"
His and Val residues block an unhindered access to the sixth coordination 
site so that a controlled binding of small molecules may result only as a 
consequence of side-chain dynamics of the protein [1]. O(2) binding results
in a transition from high-spin to low-spin iron, with accompanying changes 
in the Fe-N bond lengths and coordination geometry. In Hb, these subtle 
changes lead to the well-known cooperative effect. At the quaternary 
structure level, O(2) binding induces relative reorientation of the 
[alpha-1, beta-1] and [alpha-2, beta-2] dimers. 

Alpha- and beta-haemoglobins are highly similar; the sequence of alpha-
differs in length from that of beta-haemoglobin on average by 5 residues
(actual lengths 141 and 146 residues respectively). The major structural
difference between alpha- and beta-forms is that beta-haemoglobins contain
an alpha-helix (the D helix) that is missing in alpha-forms.

ALPHAHAEM is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for alpha-
haemoglobins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 27
sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved sections spanning the
full alignment length, focusing on those regions that characterise the
alpha-haemoglobins but distinguish them from the rest of the globin family -
motif 1 includes the second alpha-helix, leading into helix 3; motif 2 spans
the C-terminus of helix 3 and helix 4; motif 3 includes the N-terminus of 
helix 5; motif 4 spans helices 6 and 7, its C-terminal residue being the 
invariant proximal His; and motif 5 encodes helix 9. Seven iterations on
OWL30.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 272 sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches were also
found, all of which are members of the haemglobin family: most are beta- 
haemoglobins that match 2 or 3 motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 242 sequences, and 58
partial matches.
