LEUZIPPRCREB
Transcription initiation is dictated by the presence and activity of 
specific nuclear factors that bind to DNA regulatory sequences and interact
with the transcriptional machinery. The functions of some of these factors
can be altered by phosphorylation, which affects both DNA binding and
transcriptional activation [1]. Phosphorylation is effected by specific
protein kinases that have been activated by the stimulus of signal
transduction pathways, resulting in the regulation of gene transcription
by modulating the phosphorylation sites of transcription factors.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) regulates the expression of many genes via a conserved
gene promoter element CRE (cAMP response element) [2], which has the
sequence 5'-TGACGTCA-3' [3]. The cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) is a nuclear factor that is regulated by protein kinase A phos-
phorylation. Transcription is stimulated on binding to the CRE of a phos-
phorylated CREB dimer, which is held together by leucine zippers. Dimer-
isation and transcriptional efficacy have been found to be stimulated by
phosphorylation at several distinct sites, and it has thus been suggested 
[2] that CREB may be regulated by multiple kinases. Sequence analysis of 
the gene has revealed a cluster of protein kinase A, protein kinase C, and 
casein kinase II consensus recognition sites near the N-terminus of the 
protein sequence, and the proximity of these sites to one another indicates
the possibility of interaction in a positive or negative fashion to 
regulate CREB bioactivity.

The 'leucine zipper' is a structure that is believed to mediate the
function of several eukaryotic gene regulatory proteins. The zipper
consists of a periodic repetition of leucine residues at every seventh
position, and regions containing them appear to span 8 turns of alpha-
helix. The leucine side chains that extend from one helix interact with
those from a similar helix, hence facilitating dimerisation in the form
of a coiled-coil. Leucine zippers are present in many gene regulatory
proteins, including the CREB proteins, Jun/AP1 transcription factors,
fos oncogene and fos-related proteins, C-myc, L-myc and N-myc oncogenes,
and so on.

LEUZIPPRCREB is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
leucine zipper and DNA-binding domains characteristic of CREB proteins. 
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: 
motifs 4 and 5 encode the highly basic DNA-binding domain, while motifs 5
and 6 span the zipper region (cf. PROSITE pattern LEUCINE_ZIPPER (PS00029)).
Two iterations on OWL19.1 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified. Two partial
matches were also found: the first (ATF6_HUMAN) is a CREB protein fragment,
and the second (S15664) is an AP1-like transcription factor.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 15 sequences, and 14
partial matches.
