MELATONINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Melatonin is secreted by the pineal gland during darkness [6]. It regulates
a variety of neuroendocrine functions and is thought to play an essential
role in circadian rhythms [6]. Drugs that modify the action of melatonin,
and hence influence circadian cycles, are of clinical interest (for example,
in the treatment of jet-lag) [6]. Melatonin receptors are found in the 
retina, in the pars tuberalis of the pituitary, and in discrete areas of 
the brain. The receptor inhibits adenylyl cyclase via a pertussis-toxin-
sensitive G protein, probably of the Gi/Go class [6]. 

MELATONINR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
melatonin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 15 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections largely
within loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the melatonin receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 spans lies in the second
cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM domain 4; motifs 2 and 3 span the second
external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motifs 4 and 5 span the third
cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM domain 6; motif 6 lies at the C-terminus
of TM domain 6; and motif 7 spans the third external loop, leading into
TM domain 7. Two iterations on OWL29.6 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 19 sequences was identified. Several 
partial matches were also found, all of which are fragments and melatonin-
related receptor sequences that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
