ANNEXINIV
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster,
Xenopus laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and
Neurospora crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from
those found in other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino-acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium-binding sites are found in
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity, exo-
cytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the extra-
cellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA replication
[2]. The type IV class has not been identified in all species known to
possess annexins, but are thought to be required for the budding of 
clathrin-coated pits.

ANNEXINIV is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 
IV annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 6
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the N-
terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those areas that characterise
type IV annexins but distinguish them from related annexin subtypes -
motifs 1-3 lie in the first annexin repeat; and motif 4 resides in the
second repeat. Two iterations on SPTR41_24f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, Q90X16, a type IV
annexin from Xenopus laevis that failed to match motif 1.
