MUOPIOIDR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The term opioid refers to a class of substance that produces its effects
via the major classes of opioid receptor, termed mu, delta and kappa [6].
In the CNS, the mu opioid receptor is found in the cerebral cortex,
thalamus, hypothalamus, periaqueductal grey, interpeduncular nucleus and
median raphe. In the periphery, it is found in the myenteric plexus, and
in certain smooth muscles, e.g. mouse vas deferens [6]. Mu opioid
receptors are believed to mediate analgesia, hypothermia, respiratory
depression, miosis, bradycardia, nausea, euphoria and physical dependence.
Beta-endorphin is the most potent endogenous ligand.

MUOPIOIDR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
mu opioid receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the mu opioid receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the opioid receptor family - motifs 1-3 were drawn
from the N-terminal region preceding TM domain 1; motif 3 spans the
C-terminus of TM domain 4 leading into the second external loop; motif 5
spans the third external loop; and motifs 6 and 7 were drawn from the
C-terminal region following TM domain 7. Two iterations on OWL27.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
