XOPIOIDR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The term opioid refers to a class of substance that produces its effects
via the major classes of opioid receptor, termed mu, delta and kappa [6].
The receptors are found in the CNS and certain smooth muscles: mu-opioid
receptors are believed to mediate analgesia, hypothermia, respiratory
depression, miosis, bradycardia, nausea, euphoria and physical dependence,
beta-endorphin being the most potent endogenous ligand; delta-receptors
mediate analgesia; and kappa-opioid receptors are believed to mediate
analgesia, sedation, miosis and diuresis, dynorphin being the most potent
endogenous ligand.

The X-receptor is closely related to opioid receptors, on grounds of both
sequence and function, although it is not a typical opioid receptor [7].
X-receptors are found in many regions of the brain and spinal cord,
particularly limbic and hypothalamic structures. They are believed to
represent a new class of opioid receptors, with a potential role in
modulating various brain functions, including instinctive behaviours and
emotions [7].

XOPIOIDR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
X opioid receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the X opioid receptors but distinguish them from the rest
of the opioid receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the N-terminus; motif
3 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 2 leading into the first external loop;
motifs 4 and 5 lie in the second and third external loops; and motifs 6 and
7 lie at the C-terminus. Two iterations on OWL27.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
