PAIREDBOX
Organisms develop according to a precise program that specifies the body
plan in intricate detail and also determines the timing of developmental
events [1]. The highly complex nature of these events has suggested that 
the process may be regulated by proteins capable of controlling the 
temporal and spatial expression of many structural genes. The genes for 
this process were first discovered as homeotic mutations in Drosophila [2],
and many similar genes are now known in a wide variety of organisms.

Proteins that regulate developmental gene expression are nuclear proteins 
[3] that contain a conserved domain known as the homeobox, the flanking
sequences of which differ considerably among different proteins. The homeo 
domain includes the helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif, which binds to DNA in a 
sequence specific manner to exert a temporal and spatial regulation of 
developmental gene expression [4]. The second helix of the HTH motif binds
to DNA via a number of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions, which
occur between specific side chains and the exposed bases and thymine methyl
groups within the major groove. The first helix may help to stablise the 
structure [5].

Many homeodomain-containing proteins have now been sequenced and, while
the homeodomain flanking regions vary, characteristic conserved sequences 
upstream of the domain allow the proteins to be grouped into 3 subfamilies:
the so-called antennapedia, engrailed and 'paired box' proteins. The paired 
box is a conserved 124 amino acid N-terminal domain of unknown function. 
This usually, but not always, precedes a homeobox domain. Paired box genes 
are expressed in alternate segments of the developing fruit fly, the 
observed grouping of segments into pairs depending on the position of the 
segment in the segmental array, and not on the identity of the segment as 
in the case of homeotic genes. This implies that the genes affect different
processes from those altered by homeotic genes.

PAIREDBOX is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
paired box domain. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 6 sequences: the motifs span the first 80 residues of the domain,
2 and 3 including the region encoded by PROSITE pattern PAIRED_BOX 
(PS00034). Two iterations on OWL20.0 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 23 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 89 sequences, and 1
partial match.
