PLTLPOXGNASE
Lipoxygenases are iron-containing dioxygenases that catalyse the hydro-
peroxidation of lipids containing a cis,cis-1,4-pentadiene structure. They
are common in plants, where they are involved in such diverse aspects of 
plant physiology as growth and development, pest resistance and senescence 
or responses to wounding [1]. In mammals, a number of lipoxygenase isozymes
are involved in the metabolism of prostaglandins and leukotrienes [2]. 

Soybean lipoxygenase is well-characterised and its 3D structure has been 
determined [3]. The fold comprises 2 domains: the N-terminal domain forms
an 8-stranded anti-parallel jelly-roll, stabilised by a densely-packed
hydrophobic (aromatic) core; the C-terminal domain forms a much larger,
complex structure, comprising 23 helices and 2 beta-sheets, a central
43-residue helix spanning the domain. Two pi-helices are also observed in
the structure, both of which contain residues that serve as ligands to the
active site iron. 

The iron atom in lipoxygenases is bound by 4 ligands, 3 of which are
His residues [3]. In fact there are 6 histidines conserved in all lipoxy-
genases, 5 of which are clustered in a stretch of 40 amino acids. This
region contains 2 of the 3 His ligands: the other histidines are believed
to be important for lipoxygenase activity [4].

PLTLPOXGNASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for plant
lipoxygenases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 8
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise plant lipoxygenases but distinguish them from those of
mammalian origin (cf. PROSITE patterns LIPOXYGENASE_1 (PS00711) and
LIPOXYGENASE_2 (PS00081), and signatures MAMLPOXGNASE and LIPOXYGENASE).
Two iterations on OWL26.3 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 27 sequences was identified. Two partial
matches were also found, SOYLOXC and BLYLOXC, both of which are
lipoxygenase fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 47 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
