THIOREDOXIN
Thioredoxins [1-4] are small disulphide-containing redox proteins that
have been found in all the kingdoms of living organisms. Thioredoxin
serves as a general protein disulphide oxidoreductase. It interacts with
a broad range of proteins by a redox mechanism based on reversible 
oxidation of 2 cysteine thiol groups to a disulphide, accompanied by
the transfer of 2 electrons and 2 protons. The net result is the covalent
interconversion of a disulphide and a dithiol.

   TR-S(2)  +  NADPH + H(+) --> TR-(SH)2   +  NADP(+)              (1)
   trx-S(2)   +   TR-(SH)2  --> trx-(SH)2  +  TR-S(2)              (2)
   Protein-S(2) + trx-(SH)2 --> Protein-(SH)2 + trx-S(2)           (3)

In the NADPH-dependent protein disulphide reduction, thioredoxin reductase
(TR) catalyses reduction of oxidised thioredoxin (trx) by NADPH using FAD
and its redox-active disulphide (steps 1 and 2). Reduced thioredoxin
then directly reduces the disulphide in the substrate protein (step 3) [1].

Protein disulphide isomerase (PDI), a resident foldase of the endoplasmic 
recticulum, is a multi-functional protein that catalyses the formation and 
isomerisation of disulphide bonds during protein folding [5,6]. PDI contains
2 redox active domains, near the N- and C-termini, that are similar to
thioredoxin: both contribute to disulphide isomerase activity, but are 
functionally non-equivalent [6]. Interestingly, a mutant PDI, with all 4 of
the active cysteines replaced by serine, displays a low but detectable level
of disulphide isomerase activity [6]. Moreover, PDI exhibits chaperone-like
activity towards proteins that contain no disulphide bonds, i.e. behaving
independently of its disulphide isomerase activity [7]. A number of
endoplasmic reticulum proteins that differ from the PDI major isozyme
contain 2 (ERp60, ERp5) or 3 (ERp72 [8]) thioredoxin domains; all of them
seem to be PDIs.

3D-structures have been determined for a number of thioredoxins [9]. The
molecule has a doubly-wound alternating alpha/beta fold, consisting of a
5-stranded parallel beta-sheet core, enclosed by 4 alpha-helices. The
active site disulphide is located at the N-terminus of helix 2 in a short
segment that is separated from the rest of the helix by a kink caused by
a conserved proline. The 4-membered disulphide ring is located on the
surface of the protein. A flat hydrophobic surface lies adjacent to the
disulphide, which presumably facilitates interaction with other proteins.
One invariant feature of all thioredoxins is a cis-proline located in a
loop preceding beta-strand 4. This residue is positioned in van der Waals
contact with the active site cysteines and is important both for stability
and function [9]. Thioredoxin belongs to a structural family that includes
glutaredoxin, glutathione peroxidase, bacterial protein disulphide isomerase
DsbA, and the N-terminal domain of glutathione transferase [4]. Thioredoxins
have a beta-alpha unit preceding the motif common to all these proteins.

THIOREDOXIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
thioredoxins, PDIs and related proteins. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 35 sequences - motifs 1 and 2 are adjacent, spanning
an invariant Trp residue and corresponding to PROSITE pattern THIOREDOXIN
(PS00194); motif 2 encodes the N-terminus of helix 2, including the 2
invariant Cys residues that form the redox-active disulphide, and the
conserved Pro; and motif 3 spans the fourth beta-strand containing the
invariant cis-proline. Five iterations on OWL26.3 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 119 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 180 sequences, and 44
partial matches.
