RHODOPSIN
Opsins, the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision [1,2], are
integral membrane proteins that belong to a superfamily of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs). The activating ligands of the different superfamily
members vary widely in structure and character, yet the proteins appear
faithfully to have conserved a basic structural framework, believed to
consist of 7 transmembrane (TM) helices. Although the sequences of these
proteins are very diverse, reflecting to some extent this broad range of
activating ligands, nevertheless, motifs have been identified in the TM
regions that are characteristic of virtually the entire superfamily [3,4].
Amongst the exceptions are the olfactory receptors, which cluster together
in a subfamily, which lacks significant matches with domains 2, 4 and 6.
Interestingly, the opsins also seem to be emerging as increasingly atypical
of the superfamily, clustering most strongly, in phylogenetic analyses, with
the olfactory receptors [4]. 

The visual pigments comprise an apoprotein (opsin), covalently linked to
the chromophore 11-cis-retinal. The covalent link is in the form of a
protonated Schiff base between the retinal and a lysine residue located in
TM domain 7. Vision is effected through the absorption of a photon by the
chromophore, which is isomerised to the all-trans form, promoting a
conformational change in the protein.

Opsins are the photoreceptors of animal retinas [5]: vertebrate rhodopsin
is found in rod cells and mediates scotopic vision; red, green and blue
opsins are found in cone cells and mediate photopic vision. Rhodopsin has
an absorption maximum of 495nm.

RHODOPSIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
rhodopsins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the rhodopsins but distinguish them from the rest of the
rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the N-terminus; motif 3
spans the C-terminus of TM domain 2, leading into the first external loop;
motif 4 lies in the second external loop; motif 5 spans the third external
loop; and motif 6 lies at the C-terminus. Two iterations on OWL28.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 32
sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also found, all of 
which are closely related opsins or rhodopsins. Note: the true set includes
sequences designated as opsins, but whose sequence characteristics place 
them in the rhodopsin class, rather than that of their respective pigments. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 52 sequences, and 1
partial match.
