EPOXHYDRLASE
The alpha/beta hydrolase fold is common to a number of hydrolytic enzymes
of widely differing phylogenetic origin and catalytic function. The core
of each enzyme is an alpha/beta-sheet (rather than a barrel), containing 8
strands connected by helices [1]. The enzymes are believed to have diverged
from a common ancestor, preserving the arrangement of the catalytic
residues. All have a catalytic triad, the elements of which are borne on
loops, which are the best conserved structural features of the fold. 

The epoxide hydrolases (EH) add water to epoxides, forming the corresponding
diol. On the basis of sequence similarity, it has been proposed that the
mammalian soluble EHs contain 2 evolutionarily distinct domains [2]: the 
N-terminal domain is similar to bacterial haloacid dehalogenase; while the
C-terminal domain is similar to soluble plant EH, microsomal EH, and
bacterial haloalkane dehalogenase (HLD). 

The crystal structure of HLD has been resolved to 1.9A [3]. The enzyme 
contains 2 domains: domain I, has an alpha/beta type structure with a
central 8-stranded beta-sheet, and contains the nucleophile-acid-His
catalytic triad; in the linear sequence, domain I is interrupted by domain 
II (residues 156-229), which consists of alpha-helices connected by loops,
and is responsible for substrate binding and specificity. The similarity of 
EH to HLD is important for deducing a catalytic mechanism for EH. The
mechanism of HLD, established by X-ray crystallographic analysis of an
HDL-substrate intermediate [4], involves nucleophilic attack of Asp-124 on
the halogen-substituted terminal carbon of the substrate, forming a
covalently-bound ester intermediate. The Asp-260/His-289 pair activate a
water molecule that hydrolyses the ester intermediate to release the
product. Mutagenesis experiments on murine soluble EH confirmed the crucial
role of nucleophile Asp-333 and His-523 in the catalytic mechanism and 
the importance of conserved His-263 and His-332 [5].

EPOXHYDRLASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
epoxide hydrolase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
within domain I - motif 1 contains highly conserved residues that are 
putatively involved in forming an oxyanion hole, which stabilises an 
enzyme-substrate tetrahedral intermediate [1,4]; motif 3 includes an
invariant Asn (Asp-124 in HDL); motifs 5 and 6 contain a conserved
acidic residue and an invariant His, respectively, corresponding to the
Asp-260/His-289 pair of HDL (motifs 2-5 correspond to ABHYDROLASE motifs
1-4). Two iterations on OWL26.0 were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 16 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, most of which are hydrolases. The epoxide
hydrolase from Stigmatella aurantiaca (HYEP_STIAU), which shows only
marginal similarity to the EH family, matches only motifs 5 and 6.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 22 sequences, and 133
partial matches.
