PNDRDTASEII
The pyridine nucleotide-disulphide reductases (PNDR) use the isoalloxazine
ring of FAD to shuttle reducing equivalents from NAD(P)H to a Cys residue
that is usually a part of a redox-active disulphide bridge. In a second
step, the reduced disulphide reduces the substrate. On the basis of sequence
and structural similarities [1], PNDR can be categorised into 2 groups.
Class II includes: prokaryotic and eukaryotic thioredoxin reductases [2,3];
bacterial alkyl hydroperoxide reductases [4]; bacterial NADH:dehydrogenases
[5]; a probable oxidoreductase encoded in the Clostridium pasteurianum
rubredoxin operon [6]; and yeast hypothetical protein YHR106w. 

The 3D structure of E.coli thioredoxin reductase (TR) has been solved [1,7].
The protein exists as a homodimer, with 3 domains per monomer, which
correspond to the FAD-binding, NAD(P)H-binding and central domains of
glutathione reductase (GR) (cf. signature PNDRDTASEI). However, TR lacks
the domain that provides the dimer interface in GR, and forms a completely 
different dimeric structure. The relative orientation of these domains is
very different in the 2 enzymes: when the FAD-binding domains of TR and GR
are superimposed, the NADPH-binding domain of one is rotated by 66 degrees
with respect to the other. The FAD- and NAD(P)H-binding domains have a 
similar doubly-wound alpha/beta fold, suggesting they evolved by gene
duplication [8]. While in GR the redox active disulphide is located in
the FAD-binding domain, in TR it lies in the NADPH-binding domain. This
suggests that the enzymes diverged from an ancestral nucleotide-binding
protein and acquired their disulphide reductase activities independently [1]. 

PNDRDTASEII is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
PNDR class II family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 14 sequences: motifs 1 and 6 contain 3 conserved Gly residues and
correspond to the ADP moiety binding site for FAD and NAD(P) respectively
(cf. motifs 1 and 3 of signature FADPNR); motif 5 contains 2 Cys residues 
involved in the redox-active disulphide bond (motifs 5 and 6 include the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern PYRIDINE_REDOX_2 (PS000573)); and motif 9
encodes the binding site for the FAD flavin moiety (cf. motif 5 of FADPNR).
Three iterations on OWL27.0 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 24 sequences was identified, including the
hydrogen peroxide-forming NADH oxidases from Amphibacillus xylanus (A49911)
[9] and Streptococcus mutans (JC2311) [10], as well as the Entamoeba
histolytica gEh-34 gene product (EHDO34) [11]. Numerous partial matches
were also found, most of which are members of the PNDR family.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 41 sequences, and 151
partial matches.
