GPCRSTE3
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

In fungi, the mating of haploid cells is highly regulated. Yeast have a 
genetically-determined mating type (a and alpha), mating-type specific
pheromones, pheromone receptors, and a dedicated G protein signalling
pathway that prevents the mating of identical types. 

Little is known about the structure and function of the STE2 and STE3 
pheromone receptors. It is believed that they are integral membrane proteins
that may be involved in the response to mating factors on the cell membrane
[2-4]. The amino acid sequences of both receptors contain high proportions 
of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner reminiscent of 
the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with G proteins. 
However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to account for this,
there is no significant sequence similarity either between STE2 and STE3, or
between these and the rhodopsin-type family: the receptors thus bear their
own unique '7TM' signatures.

The STE3 gene in S.cerevisiae is the cell-surface receptor that binds the
13-residue lipopeptide a-factor. Several related fungal pheromone receptor
sequences are known: these include pheromone B alpha 1 and B alpha 3, and
pheromone B beta 1 receptors from Schizophyllum commune; pheromone receptor 
1 from Ustilago hordei; and pheromone receptors 1 and 2 from Ustilago maydis.
Members of the family share about 20% sequence identity.

GPCRSTE3 is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
STE3 family of fungal mating factors. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment - motif 1 spans the
first TM domain; motif 2 spans the first cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM
domain 2; motif 3 spans the rest of TM domain 2; motif 4 lies in TM domain
3; motif 5 lies in the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 6 spans TM domain 4; 
motif 7 lies in the second external loop; motif 8 spans the C-terminus of
the second external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motif 9 spans the rest
of TM domain 5; motif 10 spans the third cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM 
domain 6; motif 11 lies within TM domain 7; and motif 12 spans the 
C-terminus of TM domain 7, leading into the C-terminal domain. A single
iteration on OWL30.1 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences
being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches were found:
BAR2_SCHCO is a pheromone B alpha-2 receptor fragment that matches motifs 
1-6, and MAP3_SCHPO is a pheromone M-factor receptor that matches motifs 2-4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences, and 1
partial match.
