PANCLIPASE
Triglyceride lipases (EC 3.1.1.3) are lipolytic enzymes that hydrolyse
ester linkages of triglycerides [1]. Lipases are widely distributed in
animals, plants and prokaryotes. At least three tissue-specific isozymes
exist in higher vertebrates: pancreatic, hepatic and gastric/lingual. These
lipases are closely related to each other and to lipoprotein lipase
(EC 3.1.1.34), which hydrolyses triglycerides of chylomicrons and very
low density lipoproteins (VLDL) [2].

Pancreatic lipase (triacylglycerol acylhydrolase, EC 3.1.1.3) plays a key
role in dietary fat absorption by hydrolysing dietary long chain triacyl-
glycerol to free fatty acids and monoacylglycerols in the intestinal lumen
[3]. The activity of lipase is stimulated by colipase in the presence of
bile acids.

The 3D structure of human pancreatic lipase has been determined by X-ray
crystallography [4]. The enzyme is a single-chain glycoprotein of 449 amino 
acids. Structural results suggest that Ser 152 is the nucleophilic residue
essential for catalysis [4]. The residue is located in the N-terminal domain
at the C-terminal edge of a doubly-wound parallel beta-sheet, and forms part
of an Asp-His-Ser triad that is chemically analogous to, but structurally
different from, that of the serine proteases [4]. The putative hydrolytic
site is covered by a surface loop, and is thus inaccessible to solvent. 
It is thought that interfacial activation may involve a reorientation of
this flap, not only in pancreatic lipases but also in the related hepatic
and lipoprotein lipases [4]. 

PANCLIPASE is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
pancreatic lipases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections spanning
the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that characterise the
pancreatic lipases but distinguish them from the rest of the lipase family -
motif 1 spans the first two beta-strands; motif 2 lies in the following loop
region; motif 3 partly spans the third and fourth strands; motif 4 includes
helix 1; motif 5 includes helix 2; motif 6 spans the sixth strand and
helix 3, leading into the N-terminus of helix 4; motif 7 includes helix 8;
and motif 8 spans strands 19-21. Two iterations on OWL30.0 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 18 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, a sheep pancreatic lipase
fragment that matches motifs 1 and 2.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 15 sequences.
