DOPAMINED4R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 
Dopamine neurons in the vertebrate central nervous system are involved in
the initiation and execution of movement, the maintenance of emotional
stability, and the regulation of pituitary function [6]. Various human
neurological diseases (e.g., Parkinson disease and schizophrenia), are
believed to be manifestations of dopamine and dopamine receptor imbalance.
The receptors have been divided into several different subtypes (designated
D1-D5), which may be distinguished by their G protein coupling, ligand
specificity, anatomical distribution and physiological effects.

D4 receptors have a similar pharmacological profile to D2 receptors. They
are expressed in the brain, predominantly in the medulla, amgdala, midbrain
and frontal cortex; lower levels are found in the striatum and olfactory
tubercle [7]. D4 receptor mRNA has also been detected in peripheral tissues,
and the protein appears to be expressed preferentially in the cardiovascular
system in the rat [7]. They inhibit adenylyl cyclase through a pertussis-
toxin-sensitive G protein, probably belonging to the Gi/Go class [7]. 

DOPAMINED4R is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
dopamine D4 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections,
focusing on those areas of the alignment that characterise the D4 receptors
but distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - 
motif 1 lies in the first extracellular loop; motif 2 resides in the second
extracellular loop; and motif 3 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop. Two
iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point 
a true set comprising 13 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were
also found, O42321_CYPCA and Q5DJ15_DANRE, which are translated carp and
zebrafish mRNAs that fail to make signficant matches with motif 1 and with
motif 3, respectively.
