ADPTRNSLCASE
A variety of substrate carrier proteins that are involved in energy transfer
are found in the inner mitochondrial membrane [1-4]. Such proteins include:
ADP,ATP carrier protein (ADP/ATP translocase); 2-oxoglutarate/malate carrier
protein; phosphate carrier protein; tricarboxylate transport protein (or 
citrate transport protein); Graves disease carrier protein; yeast mito-
chondrial proteins MRS3 and MRS4; yeast mitochondrial FAD carrier protein;
and many others.

Sequence analysis of selected members of the carrier protein family has
suggested the presence of six transmembrane (TM) domains, with varying 
degrees of sequence conservation and hydrophilicity [2]. The TM regions,
and adjacent hydrophilic loops, are more highly conserved than other
regions of the proteins [2]. All members of the family appear to consist
of a tripartite structure, each of the repeated segments being ~100 residues
in length [2]. Each repeat contains two TM domains, the first being more
hydrophobic, with conserved glycyl and prolyl residues. Five of the six TM
domains are followed by the conserved sequence (D/E)-Hy(K/R){where - denotes
any residue, and Hy is a hydrophobic position} [2].

Mitochondrial ADP/ATP translocase, an abundant component of the inner
membrane, carries ATP from the matrix into the inter-membrane space and
transports ADP back [5]. The protein is an integral membrane protein that
functions as a homodimer.

ADPTRNSLCASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
adenine nucleotide carrier proteins. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1
includes the C-terminal residues of putative TM domain 1; motif 3 contains
the C-terminal residues of putative TM domain 2; motif 4 spans TM domain 3;
and motif 5 spans TM domain 5. Three iterations on OWL30.2 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 55 sequences was 
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are 
fragments or homologues that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR57.15_40.15f identified a true set of 336 sequences. 
Numerous partial matches were also found, all of which are homologues that
fail to match one or more motfs.
