RIBOSOMALS10
Ribosomes are ribonucleoprotein particles that are the site of protein
synthesis. The structure of the ribosome is well conserved across the
prokaryotic and eukaryotic lineages, reflecting the early origin of their
essential function. They comprise two subunits, which can dissociate on 
heating. In prokaryotes, the small subunit contains a single large RNA 
moeity denoted, according to its sedimentation coefficient, 16S rRNA, and 21 
different ribosomal proteins, designated S1-S21. Eukaryotic small ribosomal
subunits contain 33 proteins, many of which are similar to those found
in prokaryotes. 

There are two major tRNA binding sites on the ribosome, termed the A site, 
where incoming aminoacyl-tRNA is bound, and the P site (for peptidyl tRNA), 
where new peptide bonds are formed. The ribosomal proteins catalyse ribosome 
assembly and stabilise the rRNA, tuning the structure of the ribosome for 
optimal function [1]. Evidence suggests that, in prokaryotes, the peptidyl
transferase reaction is performed by the large subunit 23S rRNA, whereas
proteins probably have a greater role in eukaryotic ribosomes. Most of the
proteins lie close to, or on the surface of, the 30S subunit, arranged
peripherally around the rRNA [2]. The small subunit ribosomal proteins can
be categorised as primary binding proteins, which bind directly and
independently to 16S rRNA; secondary binding proteins, which display no
specific affinity for 16S rRNA, but its assembly is contingent upon the
presence of one or more primary binding proteins; and tertiary binding
proteins, which require the presence of one or more secondary binding
proteins and sometimes other tertiary binding proteins.

The small ribosomal subunit protein S10 consists of about 100 amino acid
residues. In Escherichia coli, S10 is involved in binding tRNA to the
ribosome, and also operates as a transcriptional elongation factor [3]. 
Experimental evidence [4] has revealed that S10 has virtually no groups
exposed on the ribosomal surface, and is one of the "split proteins": these are a discrete group
that are selectively removed from 30S subunits under low salt conditions 
and are required for the formation of activated 30S reconstitution
intermediate (RI*) particles. S10 belongs to a family of proteins [5] that
includes: eubacterial S10; algal chloroplast S10; cyanelle S10; archae-
bacterial S10; Marchantia polymorpha and Prototheca wickerhamii mito-
chondrial S10; Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondrial S10 (nuclear encoded); 
vertebrate S20; plant S20; and yeast URP2.

RIBOSOMALS10 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for S10
ribosomal proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 26 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length - motif 2 includes most of the central
region encoded by PROSITE pattern RIBOSOMAL_S10 (PS00361). Two iterations 
on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 57 sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also
found: two of these (RS20_MAIZE and RS10_DESMO) are fragments, lacking the
portions of sequence bearing motifs 1 and 4 respectively; and AF030961 is
a sequence from Schistosoma mansoni that fails to make a significant match
with motif 1.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 52 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
