ADENOSINER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

In addition to their role in energy metabolism, purines (especially
adenosine and adenine nucleotides) produce a wide range of pharmacological
effects mediated by activation of cell surface receptors [6]. Distinct
receptors exist for adenosine. In the periphery, the main effects of 
adenosine include vasodilation, bronchoconstriction, immunosuppresion,
inhibition of platelet aggregation, cardiac depression, stimulation of
nociceptive afferents, inhibition of neurotransmitter release and
inhibition of the release of other factors, e.g. hormones [6]. In the CNS,
adenosine exerts a pre- and post-synaptic depressant action, reducing motor
activity, depressing respiration, inducing sleep and relieving anxiety. The
physiological role of adenosine is thought to be to adjust energy demands
in line with oxygen supply. Many of the clinical actions of methylxanthines
are thought to be mediated through antagonism of adenosine receptors. Four
subtypes of receptor have been identified, designated A1, A2A, A2B and A3.

ADENOSINER is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
adenosine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections either within
loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the adenosine receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus of the first
TM domain; motif 2 spans part of the first external loop and the N-terminus
of the third TM domain; motif 3 lies at the C-terminus of TM domain 4,
leading into the second external loop; motif 4 spans part of the second
external loop and the N-terminus of TM domain 5; motif 5 spans part of the
third cytoplasmic loop and the N-terminus of TM domain 6; and motif 6 lies
at the N-terminus of TM domain 7. Three iterations on OWL26.3 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 21 sequences was
identified. Four partial matches were also found, all of which are adenosine
receptor fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 22 sequences.
