VASOPRESSINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Vasopressin and oxytocin are members of the neurohypophyseal hormone family
found in all mammalian species [6]. They are present in high levels in the
posterior pituitary. Vasopressin has an essential role in the control of 
the water content of the body, acting in the kidney to increase water and
sodium absorption [6]. In higher concentrations, vasopressin stimulates
contraction of vascular smooth muscle, stimulates glycogen breakdown in the
liver, induces platelet activation, and evokes release of corticotrophin 
from the anterior pituitary [6]. Vasopressin and its analogues are used
clinically to treat diabetes insipidus [6]. Oxytocin stimulates contraction 
of uterine smooth muscle, and stimulates milk secretion in response to 
suckling by inducing contraction of myoepithelial cells in the mammary gland
[6]. Clinically, it is used to induce labour and promote lactation.

VASOPRESSINR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
vasopressin receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 19 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that
characterise the vasopressin family of receptors but distinguish them from
the rest of the rhodopsin-like GPCRs - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus,
leading into the first TM domain; motif 2 spans the C-terminus of the first
cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM domain 2; motif 3 lies in the first
external loop; motif 4 lies in the second external loop; motif 5 lies at 
the C-terminus of TM domain 5, leading into the third cytoplasmic loop; 
motif 6 lies at the C-terminus of the third cytoplasmic loop, leading into
TM domain 6; motif 7 lies in the third external loop; and motif 8 resides
at the C-terminus of TM domain 7. Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 25 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are
fragments, or closely related rhodopsin-like GPCRs that fail to match one
or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 24 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
