FMETLEUPHER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Accumulation of phagocytic cells at sites of injury or infection is
regulated by substances that stimulate chemotaxis, granule secretion,
superoxide generation and up-regulation of cell surface adhesion molecules
in cells of the immune system [6]. The chemoattractant substances include
bacterial N-formyl-methionyl peptides (typified by fMet-Leu-Phe (fMLP)),
many of which participate in pathophysiological conditions, such as
anaphylactic and septic shock [6]. Three fMLP receptors have been
identified: fMLP selectively activates the FPR1 receptor relative to
the FPR2 receptor; its action on FPR3 is unknown. The FPR1 receptor is
found in differentiated myeloid cells (i.e., neutrophils and monocytes),
and in related cell lines; the FPR2 receptor is found only in neutrophils
and monocytes (it binds fMLP at >1000 times higher concentrations than 
at the FPR1 receptor, and may bind other N-formyl-methionyl peptides
with higher affinity) [6].

FMETLEUPHER is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
fMLP receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the fMLP receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the
rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 spans the first cytoplasmic loop;
motif 2 lies in the C-terminal half of TM domain 2; motif 3 lies in the
N-terminal half of TM domain 3; motif 4 spans the second cytoplasmic loop;
motif 5 lies in the second external loop; motif 6 was drawn from TM domain
5; motif 7 spans the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 8 lies in the
C-terminal region following TM domain 7. Two iterations on OWL27.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8
sequences was identfied. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 10 sequences, and 13
partial matches.
