ERYTHROPTN
Erythropoietin, a plasma glycoprotein, is the primary physiological
mediator of erythropoiesis [1]. It is involved in the regulation of the
level of peripheral erythrocytes by stimulating the differentiation of 
erythroid progenitor cells, found in the spleen and bone marrow, into mature
erythrocytes [2]. It is primarily produced in adult kidneys and foetal 
liver [3], acting by attachment to specific binding sites on erythroid
progenitor cells, stimulating their differentiation [3]. Severe kidney
dysfunction causes reduction in the plasma levels of erythropoietin,
resulting in chronic anaemia - injection of purified erythropoietin into
the blood stream can help to relieve this type of anaemia [1]. In cases of
severe kidney damage, causing very low erythropoietin levels, the liver
can take over production of the hormone [1].

Levels of erythropoietin in plasma fluctuate with varying oxygen tension of
the blood, but androgens and prostaglandins also modulate the levels to some
extent [3]. Erythropoietin glycoprotein sequences are well conserved, a
consequence of which is that the hormones are cross-reactive among mammals,
i.e. that from one species, say human, can stimulate erythropoiesis in
other species, say mouse or rat [4]. The human form has a single O-linked
and 3 N-linked sugar chains, which may affect biological activity, such as
turnover rate, antigenicity, and so on [1].

ERYTHROPTN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
erythropoietins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length - motif 1 includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
EPO (PS00817), the totally conserved Cys of which is involved in disulphide
bond formation; motifs 2 and 4 include conserved Asn residues, all of
which have N-linked sugar chains attached; and motif 5 has 2 conserved Ser
residues, the second of which has an O-linked sugar chain attached. Two
iterations on OWL22.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 10 sequences was identified. A single partial match was
also found, an erythropoietin fragment matching just 5 motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 8 sequences.
