ANNEXINIII
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster,
Xenopus laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and
Neurospora crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from
those found in other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino-acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium-binding sites are found in
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity, exo-
cytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the extra-
cellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA replication
[2]. Type III annexins inhibit phospholipase A2 activity, and also play a
role in inositol phosphate metabolism, cleaving the cyclic bond of
inositol-1,2-cyclic phosphate to yield inositol-1-phosphate.

ANNEXINIII is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 
III annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those areas that characterise type
III annexins but distinguish them from related annexin subtypes - motif 1
lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 resides in the first annexin repeat; motif
3 is located between the first and second repeats; motif 4 resides in the
second repeat; and motif 5 lies in the third repeat. Two iterations on
SPTR41_24f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 4 sequences was identified.
