CRBOXYPTASEC
Proteolytic enzymes that exploit serine in their catalytic activity are
ubiquitous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes [1]. They 
include a wide range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase, endo-
peptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase activity. Over 20 families
(denoted S1 - S27) of serine protease have been identified, these being
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
similarity and other functional evidence [1]. Structures are known for four
of the clans (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be totally unrelated,
suggesting at least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidases and
possibly many more [1].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and 
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

The carboxypeptidase C family comprises a number of serine carboxy-
peptidases, which are unusual in that their optimium activity occurs in
acidic conditions [1]. They are eukaryotic proteins that are located in the
lysosome in animals and the vacuole in plants and fungi [1]. The mammalian
enzyme is also refered to as 'protective protein', as it complexes 
beta-galactosidase and neurominidase in the lysosome, protecting them from
proteolytic degradation. Absence of the enzyme results in the lysosomal
storage disease galactosialidosis [1].

All members of the family are synthesised with N-terminal signal peptides,
which is consistent with their lysosomal and vacuolar locations. Each has 
a glutamate immediately preceding the catalyic serine, which is believed
to be responsible for the acidic pH optimum [1]. The 3D structures of a
number of family members are known; they show no fold similarities to
chymotrypsin, subtilisin or D-Ala-D-Ala peptidases [1]. However, there does
appear to be some similarity to the folds of other non-peptidase enzymes,
which fall into the alpha/beta hydrolase fold clan [1].

CRBOXYPTASEC is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
carboxypeptidase C (S10) family of serine proteases. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 16 sequences: the motifs were
largely drawn from conserved regions surrounding the active site - motif 3
includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern CARBOXYPEPT_SER_SER
(PS00131), which contains the catalytic Ser; and motif 4 spans the region
encoded by PROSITE pattern CARBOXYPEPT_SER_HIS (PS00560), which contains the
catalytic His (the region around the active Asp was not sufficiently well
conserved to be used as a diagnostic motif). Three iterations on OWL29.1
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 38
sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found, A41612 and
VRU49382, both of which are fragments that lack portions of sequence
bearing one or more motifs. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 52 sequences.
