ADXRDTASE
Mitochondrial P450-containing systems comprise 3 components: an FAD-
containing flavoprotein NADPH:adrenodoxin reductase (AR); an iron-sulphur 
protein, adrenodoxin; and P450 [1]. The direction of electron flow is 
NADPH --> AR --> adrenodoxin --> P450. FAD can be reduced by 2 electrons 
from NADPH, which are transferred one at a time to adrenodoxin, a one-
electron carrier. Both AR and adrenodoxin are soluble proteins located 
on the matrix side of the inner mitochondrial membrane.  

Despite functional parallels, AR shows no global similarity either to
flavoprotein pyridine nucleotide cytochrome reductases (FPNCR) or to FAD-
dependent pyridine nucleotide reductases (FADPNR) [2]. However, BLAST
searches reveal local similarity of the N-terminal region of AR to
glutamate synthase and NADH peroxidase, especially in the nucleotide-
binding regions, suggesting that AR and FADPNR may be distantly related. 

ADXRDTASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
adrenodoxin reductase family and related flavoproteins. The fingerprint 
was derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were
drawn from the N-terminal portion of the alignment - motifs 1 and 4 each
contain a conserved Gly-x-Gly-x-x-Gly/Ala consensus corresponding to the
ADP-binding sites for FAD and NAD(P) respectively (in motif 1, Gly is
always found at third position, while in motif 4 this may be replaced by
an Ala, suggesting this could be a major determinant of NADPH vs. NADH
specificity of AR [2]. Similarly, NADPH-dependent glutamate synthases
(GLTD_ECOLI and GLTD_AZOBR) contain a Gly-x-Gly-x-x-Ala pattern, whereas
NADH-dependent glutamate synthase (GLSN_MEDSA) and NADH peroxidase are
characterised by a Gly-x-Gly-x-x-Gly consensus). Two iterations on OWL26.2
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising
15 sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches were also found,
corresponding to a family of closely related flavin-containing
monooxygenases.  

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 14 sequences, and 26
partial matches.
