ANNEXINII
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster,
Xenopus laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and
Neurospora crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from
those found in other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino-acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium-binding sites are found in
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity, exo-
cytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the extra-
cellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA replication
[2]. Type II annexins bind 2 calcium ions, and inhibit phospholipase A2,
following dephosphorylation by protein kinases involved in the signal
transduction pathway. They may also cross-link plasma membrane phospholipids
with actin and the cytoskeleton, and possibly play a part in exocytosis,
as they are also involved in granule aggregation and membrane fusion.

ANNEXINII is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 
II annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 6
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those areas that characterise type
II annexins but distinguish them from related annexin subtypes - motifs 1
and 2 reside in the putative P10 binding site at the N-terminus; motif 3
lies in the second annexin repeat; motif 4 is located between the second
and third annexin repeats; motif 5 lies in repeat 3; and motif 6 resides 
between repeats 3 and 4. Two iterations on SPTR41_24f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 10 sequences was
identified. Two partial matches were also found, Q99KH3 and Q804G8, which
are type II annexin isoforms from mouse and zebrafish respectively.
