HAEMOCYANIN
Haemocyanins are copper-containing oxygen transport proteins found in the 
haemolymph of many invertebrates. They are divided into 2 main groups -
arthropodan and molluscan. These have structurally similar oxygen-binding 
centres (which are similar to the oxygen-binding centre of tyrosinases [1])
but their quaternary structures are arranged differently: the arthropodan 
proteins exist as hexamers comprising 3 heterogeneous subunits (a, b and c)
and possess 1 oxygen-binding centre per subunit; the molluscan proteins 
exist as cylindrical oligomers of 10 to 20 subunits and possess 7 or 8 
oxygen-binding centres per subunit [2]. 

Although the proteins have similar amino-acid compositions, the only real 
similarity in their primary sequences is in the region corresponding to the
second copper-binding domain, which also shows similarity to the copper-
binding domain of tyrosinases [1] (see signature TYROSINASE).

HAEMOCYANIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
arthropodan haemocyanins and closely related larval storage proteins. The 
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: motifs
1 and 2 encode the first copper-binding domain (CuA) (cf. PROSITE patterns 
HEMOCYANIN_1 (PS00209) and TYROSINASE_1 (PS00497)); motifs 3 and 4 
correspond to the area around the oxygen-binding domain; and motif 5 
encodes the second copper-binding domain (CuB) (cf. PROSITE patterns 
HEMOCYANIN_2 (PS00210) and TYROSINASE_2 (PS00498)) [1]. Three iterations on
OWL11.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 15 sequences was identified, all of which were arthropodan 
haemocyanins or arylphorin alpha subunit precursors. The latter are larval 
storage proteins found in the haemolymph of insects, and are believed to 
act as a reservoir of amino acids for the synthesis of adult proteins: like
haemocyanins, they exist as hexamers, but have 2 subunits, alpha and beta. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 49 sequences, and 6
partial matches.
