PAPAIN
Cysteine protease activity is dependent on an active dyad of cysteine and
histidine, the order and spacing of these residues varying in the 20 or so
known families. Families C1, C2 and C10 are loosely termed papain-like, and 
nearly half of all cysteine proteases are found exclusively in viruses [1].

The best known example of cysteine proteases is the papain (C1) family;
indeed many newly-discovered cysteine proteases are often termed papain-like
whether or not they are similar. The papain family has a wide variety
of activities, including broad-range (papain) and narrow-range endo-
peptidases, aminopeptidases, dipeptidyl peptidases and enzymes with both
exo- and endo-peptidase activity (such as cathepsins B and H) [1]. Some
family members have no catalytic activity. Members of the papain family
are widespread, found in baculovirus [2], eubacteria, yeast, and
practically all protozoa, plants and mammals [1]. The proteins are
typically lysosomal or secreted, although bleomycin hydrolase is
cytosolic in fungi and mammals [3]. 

The catalytic residues of papain are Cys-25 and His-159, other important 
residues being Gln-19, which helps form the "oxyanion hole", and Asn-175,
which orientates the imidazole ring of His-159. There is a high degree of
sequence similarity across the family surrounding residues Cys-25, His-159
and Asn-175, although bromelain lacks Asn-175 [4]. The family also includes some
members where the active cysteine has been replaced: e.g., soya bean
oil-associated protein (Cys to Gly); and Plasmodium surface protective
protein and Schistosoma cathepsin B-like protein (Cys to Ser in each) [1]. 

Most C1 members show a binding pocket preference for bulky hydrophobic
sidechains, but cathepsin B prefers arginine due to the presence of
different amino acid sidechains lining the pocket - the Ser-205 of papain
is replaced by Glu, which is well suited to forming salt bridges with
arginine [1]. Other members also have Ser-205 replaced with Glu, and still
others have Ser replaced with Asp [1].

As the papain family are generally secreted proteins they are synthesised 
with signal peptides and propeptides at the N-terminus: proteolytic cleavage
of the propeptide is required for enzyme activation. The majority of the
propeptides are similar to that of papain, the first 5 amino acids being
part of the 'ERFNIN' motif used to identify papain-related propeptides [1]. 
The propeptide of cathepsin B is a very potent inhibitor of the enzyme and 
is possibly a part of the mechanism for catalytic inhibition [5]. This 
method of inhibition is also found in other protease families, such as 
subtilisin [1].

The 3D structures of papain, actinidain, calotropin and cathepsin B have
been determined, and show the enzyme to be a bi-lobed protein with the
catalytic site located in the cleft between the two lobes [1].

PAPAIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the papain
(C1) family of proteases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 22 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
surrounding the active site - motif 1 includes the region encoded by
PROSITE pattern THIOL_PROTEASE_CYS (PS00139), which contains the active
cysteine; motif 2 includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern 
THIOL_PROTEASE_HIS (PS00639), which contains the active His; and motif 3
spans the region encoded by PROSITE pattern THIOL_PROTEASE_ASN (PS00640),
which contains the important Asn. Three iterations on OWL 28.3 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 228
sequences was identified. Twenty three partial matches were also found: 18
of these are fragments, 15 of which lack the first motif, and 3 lack the
third motif. Sequence BROM_ANACO is bromelain, which lacks the important
Asn-175 and shows little similarity to other C1 members in the region
of the third motif. The remaining four sequences (S52865, S48200,
LBAPEPC and PEPC_LACLC) are aminopepidase C proteins, which are members
of the C1 family that show only limited similarity to the second motif.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 254 sequences, and 8
partial matches.
