GPROTEINBRPT
Guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) are a family of membrane-
associated proteins that couple extracellularly-activated integral-membrane
receptors to intracellular effectors, such as ion channels and enzymes that
vary the concentration of second messenger molecules [1-3]. G proteins are
composed of 3 subunits (alpha, beta and gamma) which, in the resting state,
associate as a trimer at the inner face of the plasma membrane. The alpha
subunit has a molecule of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound to it:
stimulation of the G protein by an activated receptor leads to its exchange
for GTP (guanosine triphosphate). This results in the separation of the
alpha from the beta and gamma subunits, which always remain tightly
associated as a dimer. Both the alpha and beta-gamma subunits are then able
to interact with effectors, either individually or in a cooperative manner.
The intrinsic GTPase activity of the alpha subunit hydrolyses the bound GTP
to GDP. This returns the alpha subunit to its inactive conformation and
allows it to reassociate with the beta-gamma subunit, thus restoring the
system to its resting state.

Although originally thought to be a passive attenuator and membrane anchor
for the activated alpha subunit, the beta-gamma subunit is now recognised
as playing an active role in a number of different G protein-coupled
signalling events [4]. It has been shown to modulate the activity of some
isoforms of adenylyl cyclase, phospholipase C, and some ion channels. It is
involved in receptor phosphorylation via specific kinases, and has been
implicated in the p21ras-dependent activation of the MAP kinase cascade. 
It is also highly likely that it contributes to the recognition of specific
receptors by the G protein. No atomic structure is yet available for beta-
gamma subunits, but it has been proposed that they interact both with each
other and with other proteins via a coiled coil motif in their N-terminal
regions [5].

Four different G protein beta subunits have been identified in mammals,
and some have been identified in certain invertebrate species. Beta
subunits contain around 340 amino acids, with apparent molecular weights
of 35-36 kDa. Their sequences are highly conserved between species, 
implying that they perform a fundamentally important role in the 
organisation of G protein linked systems [6]. The sequences display tandem
repeats of a 40-residue domain containing a characteristic Trp-Asp motif
(the so-called WD-40 repeat [7]). The WD-40 repeat exists in numerous other
proteins, including G-beta-like peptides, yeast STE4, MSI1, CDC4, CDC20,
MAK11, PRP4, PWP1 and TUP1, slime-mould AAC3 and coronin, and Drosophila
Groucho protein. The number of repeats  within these proteins is variable,
ranging from around 5 to 8. In G-beta and G-beta-like proteins, the repeats
span the entire sequence, while in other proteins they are confined to
central or C-terminal sections.

GPROTEINBRPT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for WD-40 
repeats in a variety of proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 30 sequences: the motifs span 3 WD-40 repeats, and
include the region encoded by PROSITE pattern G_BETA_REPEATS (PS00678).
Six iterations on OWL21.1 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 40 sequences was identified. Twelve partial
matches were also found, including many proteins known to share similarity
with G-beta subunits - the relatively high number of partial matches is a
reflection of the multiple-repeat nature of the sequences, and the low
level of conservation in some of those repeats.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 413 sequences, and 83
partial matches.
