MICOLLPTASE
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship[1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1,2].

Microbial collagenases have been identified from bacteria of both the 
Vibrio and Clostridium genuses. They are zinc-containing metallopeptidases
that belong to the M25 protease family, which form part of the MA clan 
[1,3]. Collagenase is used during bacterial attack to degrade the collagen
barrier of the host during invasion. Vibrio bacteria are non-pathogenic, and 
are sometimes used in hospitals to remove dead tissue from burns and ulcers
[4]. Clostrium histolyticum is a pathogen that causes gas gangrene; 
nevertheless, the isolated collagenase has been used to treat bed sores [5].
Collagen cleavage occurs at an Xaa+Gly in Vibrio bacteria and at Yaa+Gly
bonds in Clostridium collagenases [4,5].

Analysis of the primary structure of the gene product from Clostridium 
perfringens has revealed that the enzyme is produced with a stretch of 86 
residues that contain a putative signal sequence [6]. Within this stretch
is found PLGP, an amino acid sequence typical of collagenase substrates.
This sequence may thus be implicated in self-processing of the 
collagenase [6].

MICOLLPTASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
microbial collagenase zinc metallopeptidases (M9). The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 4
includes the region encoded by the PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142),
which describes the HEXXH active site; and motif 5 contains the active site
glutamate. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 1
partial match.
