THROMBOXANER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Prostanoids (prostaglandins (PG) and thromboxanes (TX)) mediate a wide
variety of actions and play important physiological roles in the cardio-
vascular and immune systems, and in pain sensation in peripheral systems
[6]. PGI2 and TXA2 have opposing actions, involving regulation of the
interaction of platelets with the vascular endothelium. To date, evidence
for at least 5 classes of prostanoid receptor has been obtained. However,
identification of subtypes and their distribution is hampered by expression
of more than one receptor within a tissue, coupled with poor selectivity of
available agonists and antagonists. Moreover, many endogenous prostanoids
undergo rapid metabolism, especially TXA2 [6]. 

THROMBOXANER is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
thromboxane receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
either within loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the thromboxane receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies in the N-terminus;
motifs 2, 3 and 5 were drawn from TM domains 2, 3 and 5; motifs 4 and 6
span the second external loop and third cytoplasmic loop res.; and motif 7
lies at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL26.2 was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Several partial matches were also found, all of which are closely related
prostaglandin receptors matching motifs 2,3 and 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences, and 8
partial matches.
