CYTOCHROMEC3
Cytochromes c (cyt c) can be defined as electron-transfer proteins having
one or several haem c groups, bound to the protein by one or, more
generally, two thioether bonds involving sulphydryl groups of cysteine
residues. The fifth haem iron ligand is always provided by a histidine
residue. Cyt c possess a wide range of properties and function in a large
number of different redox processes [1].

Ambler [2] recognised four classes of cyt c. Class III comprises the low 
redox potential multiple haem cytochromes: cyt c7 (trihaem), c3 (tetrahaem),
and high-molecular-weight cyt c, HMC (hexadecahaem), with only 30-40 
residues per haem group. The haem c groups, all bis-histidinyl coordinated,
are structurally and functionally nonequivalent and present different redox
potentials in the range 0 to -400 mV [3]. 

The 3D structures of a number of cyt c3 have been determined. The proteins
consist of 4-5 alpha-helices and 2 beta-strands wrapped around a compact
core of four non-parallel haems, which present a relatively high degree of 
exposure to the solvent. The overall protein architecture, haem plane 
orientations and iron-iron distances are highly conserved [3]. 

CYTOCHROMEC3 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
class III cyt c. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 9
sequences: motifs 1 and 2 are adjacent, motif 1 including an invariant Phe
and two invariant His residues, which function as the axial ligands for two
different haems (in tetrahaem cyt c, these are haem 1 and 3; in trihaem cyt
c, they are haem 1 and haem 2); motifs 2-4 each include two invariant Cys
residues, which covalently bind the haem group, and a His residue, which
provides the haem iron axial ligand (cf. PROSITE pattern CYTOCHROME_C). In
tetrahaem cyt c, motifs 2-4 bind haem groups 1, 3 and 4 res.; in trihaem cyt
c, they bind haem groups 1, 2 and 3 res.. In tetrahaem cyt c and HMC, motif
2 includes two adjacent His residues: in tetrahaem cyt c these provide the
axial ligands to haem groups 1 and 2 [3]; in trihaem cyt c the second His
is replaced by Glu. Two iterations on OWL28.0 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 12 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 10 sequences.
