PEPDIPTASEA
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship [1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1].

Pepetidyl-dipeptidase A (angiotensin-converting enzyme) is a mammalian 
enzyme responsible for cleavage of dipeptides from the C-termini of
proteins, notably converting angiotensin I to angiotensin II [1]. The enzyme
exists in two differentially transcribed forms, the most common of which
is from lung endothelium; this contains two homologous domains that have
arisen by gene duplication [1]. The testis-specific form contains only the 
C-terminal domain, arising from a duplicated promoter region present in
intron 12 of the gene [1]. 

Both enzymatic forms are membrane proteins that are anchored by means of a
C-terminal transmembrane domain. Both domains of the endothelial enzyme are
active, but have differing kinetic constants [1]. The catalytic residues and
zinc ligands have been identified, showing that the enzyme belongs to the 
HEXXH+E sub-group of metalloproteases [1,2]. A number of insect enzymes have
been shown to be similar to peptidyl-dipeptidase A, these containing a
single catalytic domain.

PEPDIPTASEA is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
peptidyl-dipeptidase A (M2) family of metalloproteases. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions within a single catalytic domain - motif 4 includes
the region encoded by PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142), which
contains the HEXXH motif; and motif 5 contains the additional zinc-binding
glutamate residue. Two iterations on OWL29.3 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 15 sequences was
identified. Two partial matches were also found: RATKII is an angiotensin-
converting enzyme fragment that matches motifs 1 and 2; CELC42D82 is a
sequence from cosmid C42D8 of C.elegans that matches motifs 1-3 and 6-8,
but does not contain the HEXXH motif or the additional glutamate zinc
ligand present in active members of the family. Note that the fingerprint
matches both domains of the mammalian endothelial enzymes.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 12 sequences, and 1
partial match.
