LYSOZYMEG
Goose-type lysozyme (lysozyme G) hydrolyses 1,4-beta-linkages between
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid in peptidoglycan hetero-
polymers of prokaryote cell walls. Lysozyme G shows preference for 
N-acetylmuramic acid residues that are substituted with a peptide moiety;
it acts only as a glycanohydrolase.

The structure of goose egg-white lysozyme (GEWL) with a bound trisaccharide
has been refined to 1.6A resolution [1]. The trisaccharide occupies
analogous sites to the B, C and D subsites of chicken (HEWL) and phage T4
(T4L) lysozymes. All of these enzymes display the same characteristic 
hydrogen bonding pattern between protein and substrate [1]. Glu73 of GEWL 
corresponds closely to Glu35 of HEWL (Glu11 of T4L), supporting the view
that this group is critical to the catalytic mechanism. However, lysozyme G
has no obvious counterpart to Asp52 of chicken lysozyme (Asp20 in T4L),
suggesting that a second acidic residue is not essential for its catalytic
activity, and may not be required for the activity of other lysozymes.

The structure of GEWL belongs to the mainly alpha class, its sequence
showing no discernible similarity to other lysozymes. The enzyme has
been classified as belonging to family 23 of glycosyl hydrolases [2]
(http://expasy.hcuge.ch/cgi-bin/lists?glycosid.txt).

LYSOZYMEG is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
lysozyme G. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length - motif 1 spans the first 3 helices; motif 2 spans
helices 4 and 5; motif 3 encompasses part of helices 6 and 7; motif 4 spans
the C-terminus of helix 7 and the first beta-strand; motif 5 includes the
second beta-strand; motif 6 encompasses part of helices 8 and 9; motif 7
spans the C-terminus of helix 9 and helix 10; and motif 8 spans helices 11
and 12. A single iteration on OWL29.3 was required to reach convergence,
no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
