INTERLEUKIN1
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a cytokine with a wide range of biological and
physiological effects, including fever, prostaglandin synthesis (in e.g.,
fibroblasts, muscle and endothelial cells), T-lymphocyte activation, and 
interleukin-2 production [1]. This family is a member of a superfamily that
also contains the heparin binding growth factors (HBGF), the Kunitz-type 
soybean trypsin inhibitors (STI) and histactophilin. All have very similar
structures, but although the interleukin-1 and HBGF families share some
sequence similarity (about 25%), they show none at all to the STIs.

Over a hundred cytokines have now been identified, including several
putative new members of the IL-1 family [2]. The IL-1 family consists of 2
main classes, designated alpha (IL1A) and beta (IL1B), as well as the more
recently discovered IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL1RA). Sequence similarity 
is high within the IL1A and IL1B subfamilies (about 60-70%) but low between
them (less than 30%). IL1As and IL1Bs are synthesised as larger precursors, 
which are processed to give mature carboxy fragments. IL1B requires this 
cleavage to become biologically active, but IL1A precursor is already 
active. Both IL1A and IL1B bind to the same IL1-specific receptor on the 
target cell, which is then internalised to initiate the relevant effects
(which appear to be similar or identical).

IL1RA binds to the IL1 receptor, blocking the effects of IL1A and IL1B
whilst eliciting no response of its own. From sequence comparisons it seems
to have arisen by gene duplication before IL1 diverged into IL1A and IL1B,
as it has features of both [3]. It seems likely to have the same fold as
IL1A and IL1B. 
              
The crystal structures of IL1A and IL1B [4] have been solved, showing them 
to share the same 12-stranded beta-sheet structure as both the heparin
binding growth factors and the Kunitz-type soybean trypsin inhibitors [5].
The beta-sheets are arranged in 3 similar lobes around a central axis, 6
strands forming an anti-parallel beta-barrel. Several regions, especially 
the loop between strands 4 and 5, have been implicated in receptor binding.

INTERLEUKIN1 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
interleukin-1 precursor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 28 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 encodes beta-strands
5 and 6; motif 2 spans alpha-helix 2 and strand 8; and motif 3 encompasses
strands 9 and 10. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 42 sequences was 
identified. A single partial match was also found, IL1A_CERTO, an IL-1
alpha precursor from the sooty mangabey that fails to match motif 2.
