ENGRAILED
Organisms develop according to a precise program that specifies the body
plan in intricate detail and also determines the timing of developmental
events [1]. The highly complex nature of these events has suggested that 
the process may be regulated by proteins capable of controlling the 
temporal and spatial expression of many structural genes. The genes for 
this process were first discovered as homeotic mutations in Drosophila [2],
and many similar genes are now known in a wide variety of organisms.

Proteins that regulate developmental gene expression are nuclear proteins 
[3] that contain a conserved domain known as the homeobox, the flanking
sequences of which differ considerably among different proteins. The homeo 
domain includes the helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif, which binds to DNA in a 
sequence-specific manner to exert a temporal and spatial regulation of 
developmental gene expression [4]. The second helix of this motif binds 
to DNA via a number of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions, which
occur between specific side chains and the exposed bases and thymine methyl
groups within the major groove. The first helix may help to stablise the 
structure [5].

Many homeodomain-containing proteins have now been sequenced and, while
the homeodomain-flanking regions vary, characteristic conserved sequences
upstream of the domain allow the proteins to be grouped into 3 subfamilies:
the so-called antennapedia, engrailed and 'paired box' proteins. Engrailed 
plays an important role in Drosophila segmentation and neurogenesis, 
affecting genes in posterior compartments of the developing embryo. It is 
also required for the development of the central nervous system. Homologues
found in other species may play a role in neurogenesis, possibly in both 
the compartmentalisation of the developing neural tube and specification of
particular neuronal populations. Members of the engrailed subfamily of
proteins contain a conserved region of 20 amino acids located to the
C-terminal of the homeobox, the specific function of which is unclear.

ENGRAILED is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
engrailed-type homeobox proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 6 sequences: motif 2 encodes the conserved region to
the C-terminus of the homeobox (cf. PROSITE pattern ENGRAILED (PS00033)).
Two iterations on OWL20.0 were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 20 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 25 sequences.
