ERYTHCRUORIN
Globins are haem-containing proteins involved in dioxygen binding and/or 
transport [1,2]. Hundreds of globin sequences are known [3]. It has been 
proposed that all globins have evolved from a family of ancestral, ~17kDa 
haemoproteins that displayed the globin fold and functioned as redox 
proteins [4]. The globin superfamily includes vertebrate haemoglobins (Hb); 
vertebrate myoglobins (Mb); invertebrate globins; plant leghaemoglobins; and 
bacterial flavohaemoglobins. 

The function of haemoglobins (Hbs) is transport of dioxygen in blood plasma.
Erythrocruorins (Ec) are extracellular Hbs found freely dissolved in the 
blood of annelids and arthropods. Ec molecules exist as aggregates of up to
200 small globin-like subunits, some of which are disulphide-bonded and not
all of which contain haem [5]. Nematodes (e.g., Ascaris) possess an octa-
meric Hb, each subunit containing two globin-like domains. Ascaris Hb binds
oxygen four orders of magnitude more tightly than does human Hb [6]. The
brine shrimp Artemia has evolved the longest known concatenation of globin
domains: each subunit contains 9 globin-like domains, connected by linking
peptides [7]. Artemia possess three types of dimeric haemoglobins: HbI
(alpha+alpha); HbII (alpha+beta); and HbIII (beta+beta). 

The 3D structures of a number of Ecs are known. The protein is largely 
alpha-helical, eight conserved helices (A to H) providing the scaffold for 
a well-defined haem-binding pocket. The imidazole ring of the "proximal" His 
residue provides the fifth haem iron ligand; the other axial haem iron 
position remains essentially free for O(2) coordination. Many Ecs lack
the "distal" His and Val residues that are conserved in vertebrate globins.

ERYTHCRUORIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
erythrocruorins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 17 sequences (both N- and C-terminal globin-like domains of GLB_ASCSU 
and GLB_PSEDC were used to construct the alignment): motif 1 spans helices B
and C; motif 2 corresponds to helix F, and includes the invariant proximal
His residue; motif 3 includes helix G; and motif 4 spans helix H. Three
iterations on OWL28.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 62 sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches
were also found, most of which are members of the globin superfamily.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 64 sequences, and 104
partial matches.
