GNADOTRPHINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is an important hypothalamic
regulator of reproductive processes [6]. Its major site of action is in
the regulation of synthesis and release of gonadotrophins (FSH and LH)
from the anterior pituitary. GnRH agonists are of potential therapeutic
use in the suppression of prostate cancer and endometriosis [6]. GnRH
receptors are found in the anterior pituitary, placenta, ovary, testis,
prostate, breast, and in certain tumours and immortalised cell lines.
They are also present in the nervous system and gonads of certain species.

GNADOTRPHINR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone receptors. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved sections within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those
areas of the alignment that characterise the GnRH receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies at the
N-terminus; motif 2 encodes part of TM domain 1; motif 3 spans the first
cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans the first external loop; motif 5 encodes
part of TM domain 4; motif 6 spans the second external loop; motif 7 spans
the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 8 spans the third external loop. A
single iteration on OWL28.0 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
