IPNSYNTHASE
Isopenicillin N synthase (IPNS) is a nonheme-Fe2+-dependent enzyme that
belongs to a class of nonheme Fe2+-containing enzymes, which includes
2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, 2-oxoglutarate-dependent hydroxy-
lases, and enzymes involved in ethylene formation and anthocyaninidin
biosynthesis. IPNS catalyses the stereospecific formation of the beta-lactam 
and thiazolidine rings of IPN via a 4-electron oxidation of the tripeptide
ACV. The enzyme uses, as the sole electron acceptor, one molecule of
dioxygen, which is completely reduced to two molecules of water. The oxygen 
stoichiometry shown by IPNS is the same as that for cytochrome C oxidase,
but is unusual for nonheme-iron-containing enzymes, which typically catalyse
the transfer of one or both atoms of dioxygen into their substrates. IPNS
thus provides an interesting contrast to dioxygenase enzymes.

All IPNS proteins reported to date have a molecular mass of 30-40kDa and
are highly conserved. The degree of identity in the predicted amino acid
sequence ranges from 54-75%. Two cysteines are invariant in all known IPNS
sequences; these residues are believed to be functionally important for
iron binding. Histidine and aspartic acid residues in the sequence
constitute the endogenous ligands of the ferrous active site.

IPNSYNTHASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for isopenicillin
N synthases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 8
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motifs 1,2,4 and 7 encompass conserved
histidines; motifs 4 and 6 include conserved aspartic acid residues; and
motifs 3 and 7, which include conserved cysteines, lie in the regions
encoded by PROSITE patterns IPNS_1 (PS00185) and IPNS_2 (PS00186) res..  
Two iterations on OWL29.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 10 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found, representing a subfamily of iron/ascorbate-dependent 
oxidoreductases - these match motifs 1 and 7, which contain the functionally 
important His residues.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences, and 6
partial matches.
