LEUZIPPRFOS
Implicit in the growth regulatory functions of all proto-oncogenes is the 
potential to induce abnormal cell growth [1] and cancer as a result of
alterations in gene expression. This may be a qualitative or quantitative 
alteration, the viral oncogenes activating this potential by transducing a 
truncated or mutated form of the protein product, or by increasing 
transcription of the proto-oncogene by the integration of a viral promoter 
and enhancer sequence in its vicinity.

Both the cellular and viral forms of the fos gene encode a phosphoprotein
that is located in the nucleus of cells, and forms a noncovalent complex
with several other proteins, a leucine zipper holding the dimer together. 
The dimer is associated with chromatin and demonstrates specific and non-
specific DNA-binding properties [2], the DNA being bound by a highly basic 
area in the protein sequence immediately preceding the zipper domain.
Expression of the fos gene is stimulated by mitogens, suggesting that the
gene product is involved in cell growth [3], and may act as a nuclear
signal in a more general sense.

The 'leucine zipper' is a structure that is believed to mediate the
function of several eukaryotic gene regulatory proteins. The zipper
consists of a periodic repetition of leucine residues at every seventh
position, and regions containing them appear to span 8 turns of alpha-
helix. The leucine side chains that extend from one helix interact with
those from a similar helix, hence facilitating dimerisation in the form
of a coiled-coil. Leucine zippers are present in many gene regulatory
proteins, including the CREB proteins, Jun/AP1 transcription factors,
fos oncogene and fos-related proteins, C-myc, L-myc and N-myc oncogenes,
and so on.

LEUZIPPRFOS is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
leucine zipper and DNA-binding domains characteristic of the fos oncogenes 
and fos-related proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 6 sequences: motifs 2 and 3 span the highly basic DNA-
binding domain, while motifs 4 and 5 encode the zipper region (cf.
PROSITE patterns FOS_JUN_BASIC (PS00036) and LEUCINE_ZIPPER (PS00029)).
Two iterations on OWL19.1 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 14 sequences was identified. Several partial
matches were also found: of those matching just 4 motifs, both are CREB 
protein fragments that are highly similar to the DNA-binding and zipper
domains of the fos gene products; those matching just 2 or 3 motifs are
myosin heavy chains, which form coiled coils using a system similar to
leucine zippers.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 24 sequences, and 6
partial matches.
