CADHERIN
Cadherins, first discovered in mouse teratocarcinoma cells [1], are 
structurally and functionally similar molecules [2] that take part in 
selective calcium-dependent adhesion interactions between cell surfaces
[3]. There are a number of different isoforms distributed in a tissue-
specific manner in a wide variety of organisms. Cells containing different 
cadherins tend to segregate in vitro, while those that contain the same 
cadherins tend to preferentially aggregate together. This observation is 
linked to the finding that cadherin expression causes morphological changes
involving the positional segregation of cells into layers, suggesting they 
may play an important role in the sorting of different cell types during 
morphogenesis, histogenesis and regeneration. They may also be involved in 
the regulation of tight and gap junctions, and in the control of 
intercellular spacing.

Structurally, cadherins comprise a number of domains: these include a
signal sequence; a propeptide of around 130 residues; an extracellular 
domain of around 600 residues; a single transmembrane domain; and a 
well-conserved C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of about 150 residues. 
The extracellular domain can be subdivided into 5 parts, 4 of which are 
repeats of about 110 residues, and the fifth contains 4 conserved
cysteines. The calcium-binding region of cadherins is thought to be located
in the extracellular domain.

CADHERIN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
cadherins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 34
sequences: the motifs were drawn from the N-terminal half of the alignment -
motif 1 lies in the first cadherin repeat; motifs 2-4 lie in the second
repeat; motifs 5 and 6 lie in the third repeat; and motif 7 lies at the
C-terminus of the fourth repeat. Eight iterations on SPTR39_15f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 205
sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches were also found, all of
which are cadherins or cadherin-related proteins that fail to match one or
more motifs.
