VIRIONINFFCT
The virion infectivity factor (vif) of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 affects the infectivity of virus particles [1] (in some cases
increasing the infectivity of HIV-1 particles by 100- to 1000-fold), 
but has no direct effect on transcription, translation or virus release.
Vif antibodies are found in the sera of patients at all levels of HIV-1
infection, indicating that vif is expressed in natural infections in vivo.
Other lentiviruses, including simian immunodeficiency virus, visna virus,
and feline immunodeficiency virus, have vif open reading frames, suggesting
vif plays an essential role during natural infections [2].

The expression of vif in BHK-21 cells has been shown to be linked to a
modification of the C-terminus of gp41env, which modification is
inhibited by trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido-(4-guanidio)butane (E64),
a specific inhibitor of cysteine proteases [3]. Coupled with sequence
analysis and the effects of point mutations in vif, it has been suggested
that vif could be a cysteine protease.

VIRIONINFFCT is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for vif
proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 6
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length, motif 6 including the conserved Cys thought to be similar
to that of the thiol proteases (a His, also suggested by Guy et al. to be
similar to the thiol proteases, was not conserved in the vif alignment).
Two iterations on OWL22.1 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 45 sequences was identified. Three partial
matches were also found, all of which are vif proteins. No thiol proteases
were identified. In this respect, we concur with Henikoff and Henikoff, who
find insufficient similarity between thiol protease blocks and various vif
sequences to draw conclusions about a relationship between the families [4].

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 438 sequences, and 24
partial matches.
