PHEROMONEBAR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

In fungi, the mating of haploid cells is highly regulated. Yeast have a 
genetically-determined mating type (a and alpha), mating-type specific
pheromones, pheromone receptors, and a dedicated G protein signalling
pathway that prevents the mating of identical types. 

Little is known about the structure and function of the STE2 and STE3 
pheromone receptors. It is believed that they are integral membrane proteins
that may be involved in the response to mating factors on the cell membrane
[2-4]. The amino acid sequences of both receptors contain high proportions 
of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner reminiscent of 
the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with G proteins. 
However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to account for this,
there is no significant sequence similarity either between STE2 and STE3, or
between these and the rhodopsin-type family: the receptors thus bear their
own unique '7TM' signatures.

The STE3 gene in S.cerevisiae is the cell-surface receptor that binds the
13-residue lipopeptide a-factor. Several related fungal pheromone receptor
sequences are known: these include pheromone B alpha 1 and B alpha 3, and
pheromone B beta 1 receptors from Schizophyllum commune; pheromone receptor 
1 from Ustilago hordei; and pheromone receptors 1 and 2 from Ustilago maydis.
Members of the family share about 20% sequence identity.

The multiallelic mating type locus B alpha-1 of S.commune encodes 
a pheromone receptor and putative pheromone genes [5]. Analysis of this
locus has provided evidence that pheromones and pheromone receptors govern
recognition of self versus non-self, and sexual development in this 
homobasidiomycetous fungus [6].

PHEROMONEBAR is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
pheromone B alpha-1 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that
characterise the B alpha-1 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the STE3 family - motif 1 spans the N-terminal portion of putative TM domain
1; motif 2 spans the first cytoplasmic loop and the N-terminus of TM domain
2; motif 3 lies in the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 lies in the second
external loop; motif 5 spans TM domain 6; motifs 6 and 7 lie in the third 
external loop; motif 8 spans the N-terminus of TM domain 7; and motifs 9-12
reside in the C-terminal domain. A single iteration on OWL30.1 was required
to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the
starting set. A single partial match was found, BAR2_SCHCO, a pheromone B 
alpha-2 receptor fragment that matches motifs 1-3.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
