TYPE3IMQPROT
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens, such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[2] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [3]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [3], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

It is believed that the family of type III inner membrane proteins are 
used as structural moieties in a complex with several other subunits [4], 
including the ATPase necessary for driving the secretion system. One such
set of inner membrane proteins, termed "Q" here for nomenclature purposes,
includes the Salmonella and Shigella SpaQ, the Yersinia YscS, the Rhizobium 
Y4YM, and the Erwinia HrcS genes [4]. The flagellar protein FliQ also shares 
similarity, probably due to evolution of the type III secretion system from
the flagellar biosynthetic pathway.

TYPE3IMQPROT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type III secretion system inner membrane Q protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from short conserved regions spanning the full alignment length - motifs 1
and 3 each encode a putative TM region. Three iterations on OWL30.2 were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 21
sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 28 sequences.
