CHYMOTRYPSIN
Proteolytic enzymes that exploit serine in their catalytic activity are
ubiquitous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes [1]. They 
include a wide range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase, endo-
peptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase activity. Over 20 families
(denoted S1 - S27) of serine protease have been identified, these being
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
similarity and other functional evidence [1]. Structures are known for four
of the clans (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be totally unrelated,
suggesting at least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidases and
possibly many more [1].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and 
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

The trypsin family is almost totally confined to animals, although trypsin-
like enzymes are found in actinomycetes of the genera Streptomyces and
Saccharopolyspora, and in the fungus Fusarium oxysporum [1]. The enzymes
are inherently secreted, being synthesised with a signal peptide that
targets them to the secretory pathway. Animal enzymes are either secreted
directly, packaged into vesicles for regulated secretion, or are retained
in leukocyte granules [1].

Members of the chymotrypsin family may occasionally function intracellularly
(for example, the intracellular digestion of bacteria in neutrophils), but
most function extracellularly, for example in roles such as food digestion, 
fibrinolysis and complement activation [1].

The essential catalytic unit of the chymotrypsin family is around 220 
amino acids in length, although the protein may be extended at the
N-terminus with unrelated sequences, often containing modules. They are
rarely extended at the C-terminus: exceptions include acrosin, complement 
component C2, and coagulation factor X, which has a 16 residue extension
that is removed upon activation [1]. 

Proteolytic activation of the protein takes place extracellularly, or
sometimes in storage organelles, creating a new N-terminal residue - this is
often isoleucine, but may be leucine, valine or methionine [3]. Salivary
plasminogen activator from vampire bat contains serine as its new N-terminal
residue [2]. The N-terminus forms a salt-bridge with Asp-194, leading to the
formation of the functional active site [1]. The cleaved propeptide can be 
as small as two amino acids, but many are much larger peptides that may 
contain modules. The cleaved peptide, not uncommonly, remains disulphide-
bonded to the active enzyme [1].

A number of non-functional proteins that have one or more of the active
site residues substituted belong to this family, including haptoglobulin,
azurocidin and apolipoprotein A.

Actinomycete trypsins are too similar to their eukaryotic counterparts to be
consistent with divergence 3500 million years ago when the common precursor
of prokaryotes and eukaryotes is thought to have lived. Hartley attempted
to explain this by suggesting a horizontal gene transfer from the higher
organisms to bacteria [4]. However, Young et al. suggested a horizontal gene
transfer from bacteria to higher organisms around 1300 million years ago,
when mitochondria were introduced into eukaryotes [5]. This is thought to 
be a more likely scenario [1].

CHYMOTRYPSIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
chymotrypsin (S1) family of serine proteases. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 26 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions around the active site - motif 1 includes the region
encoded by PROSITE pattern TRYPSIN_HIS (PS00134), which contains the
catalytic histidine; motif 2 contains the catalytic aspartate; and motif 3
includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern TRYPSIN_SER (PS00135), which
contains the catalytic serine. Four iterations on OWL28.2 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 460 sequences was
identified. Twenty six partial matches were also found: 23 of these are
fragments, most of which lack the first motif; 9 sequences lack the second
motif; and 4 lack the final motif.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 450 sequences, and 77
partial matches.
