FNTYPEII
Fibronectins are multi-domain glycoproteins, found in a soluble form in
plasma, and in an insoluble form in loose connective tissue and basement
membranes [1]. They contain multiple copies of 3 repeat regions (types 
I, II and III), which bind to a variety of substances, including heparin,
collagen, DNA, actin, fibrin and fibronectin receptors on cell surfaces.
The wide variety of these substances means that fibronectins are involved 
in a number of important functions: e.g., wound healing; cell adhesion;
blood coagulation; cell differentiation and migration; maintenance of the
cellular cytoskeleton; and tumour metastasis [2]. The role of fibronectin 
in cell differentiation is demonstrated by the marked reduction in the 
expression of its gene when neoplastic transformation occurs. Cell 
attachment has been found to be mediated by the binding of the tetrapeptide
RGDS to integrins on the cell surface [3], although related sequences can 
also display cell adhesion activity.

Plasma fibronectin occurs as a dimer of 2 different subunits, linked 
together by 2 disulphide bonds near the C-terminus. The difference in the 
2 chains occurs in the type III repeat region and is caused by alternative 
splicing of the mRNA from one gene [1]. The observation that, in a given 
protein, an individual repeat of one of the 3 types (e.g., the first FnII 
repeat) shows much less similarity to its subsequent tandem repeats within
that protein than to its equivalent repeat between fibronectins from other 
species, has suggested that the repeating structure of fibronectin arose at
an early stage of evolution. It also seems to suggest that the structure is
subject to high selective pressure [4].

The FnII repeat lies in the collagen-binding fragment of fibronectin [1].
The precise location of the collagen binding site, however, has yet to be
ascertained: it is thus unclear whether it is contained within the type II 
repeat itself.

FNTYPEII is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type II
fibronectin repeats. The fingerprint was derived from an initial align-
ment of 7 sequences: the motifs span the full length of the FnII domain
(cf. PROSITE pattern FIBRONECTIN_2 (PS00023)). Two iterations on OWL19.0
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising
16 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 41 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
