RIBOSOMALS19
Ribosomes are ribonucleoprotein particles that are the site of protein
synthesis. The structure of the ribosome is well conserved across the
prokaryotic and eukaryotic lineages, reflecting the early origin of their
essential function. They comprise two subunits, which can dissociate on 
heating. In prokaryotes, the small subunit contains a single large RNA 
moeity denoted, according to its sedimentation coefficient, 16S rRNA, and 21 
different ribosomal proteins, designated S1-S21. Eukaryotic small ribosomal
subunits contain 33 proteins, many of which are similar to those found
in prokaryotes. 

There are two major tRNA binding sites on the ribosome, termed the A site, 
where incoming aminoacyl-tRNA is bound, and the P site (for peptidyl tRNA), 
where new peptide bonds are formed. The ribosomal proteins catalyse ribosome 
assembly and stabilise the rRNA, tuning the structure of the ribosome for 
optimal function [1]. Evidence suggests that, in prokaryotes, the peptidyl
transferase reaction is performed by the large subunit 23S rRNA, whereas
proteins probably have a greater role in eukaryotic ribosomes. Most of the
proteins lie close to, or on the surface of, the 30S subunit, arranged
peripherally around the rRNA [2]. The small subunit ribosomal proteins can
be categorised as primary binding proteins, which bind directly and
independently to 16S rRNA; secondary binding proteins, which display no
specific affinity for 16S rRNA, but its assembly is contingent upon the
presence of one or more primary binding proteins; and tertiary binding
proteins, which require the presence of one or more secondary binding
proteins and sometimes other tertiary binding proteins.

The small ribosomal subunit protein S19 contains 88-144 amino acid residues.
In Escherichia coli, S19 is known to form a complex with S13 that binds 
strongly to 16S ribosomal RNA. Experimental evidence [3] has revealed that 
S19 is moderately exposed on the ribosomal surface, and is designated 
a secondary rRNA binding protein. S19 belongs to a family of ribosomal 
proteins [3,4] that includes: eubacterial S19; algal and plant chloroplast 
S19; cyanelle S19; archaebacterial S19; plant mitochondrial S19; and 
eukaryotic S15 ('rig' protein).

RIBOSOMALS19 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for S19 
ribosomal proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 29 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
the full alignment length - motifs 3 and 4 span the conserved C-terminal
region encoded by PROSITE pattern RIBOSOMAL_S19 (PS00323). Two iterations 
on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 66 sequences was identified. A single partial match was also
found, RS19_YERPS, a fragment that lacks the portion of sequence bearing
motif 3.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 62 sequences, and 1
partial match.
