RNADNAPOLMS
DNA	carries the biological information that instructs cells how to exist
in an ordered fashion: accurate replication is thus one of the most
important events in the cell life cycle. This function is mediated by
DNA-directed DNA-polymerases, which add nucleotide triphosphate (dNTP)
residues to the 5'-end of the growing DNA chain, using a complementary 
DNA as template. 

The use of an RNA template to produce DNA, for integration into the host 
genome and exploitation of a host cell, is a strategy employed in the 
replication of retroid elements, such as the retroviruses and bacterial
retrons [1]. The enzyme catalysing polymerisation is an RNA-directed DNA-
polymerase, or reverse trancriptase (RT) (EC 2.7.7.49).  

The RNA-dependent DNA-polymerases belong to a number of different groups,
based on host specificity [2]. One group of RTs, originally identified in
myxobacteria, produces a branched RNA-linked multi-copy single stranded DNA
(mSDNA), the function of which is unknown. The presence of msDNA is
characteristic of a number of retroid elements. These polymerases are
also assumed to carry a ribonuclease H activity.

Three motifs, A, B and C, as defined by Delarue et al. [2], are seen to be 
conserved across all DNA-polymerases, with motifs A and C also seen in RNA- 
polymerases. They are centered on invariant residues, and their structural 
significance was implied from the Klenlow (E.coli) structure: motif A 
contains a strictly-conserved aspartate at the junction of a beta-strand 
and an alpha-helix; motif B contains an alpha-helix with positive charges; 
and motif C has a doublet of negative charges, located in a beta-turn-beta 
secondary structure [2]. 

RNADNAPOLMS is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
RNA-dependent DNA-polymerase (msDNA) family. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions from the N-terminal portion of the alignment, i.e. within
the RT domain - motif 4 encodes "motif A"; and motif 8 shows significant 
similarity to "motif C". Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified.
Several partial matches were also found, all of which are divergent family 
members.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences, and 10
partial matches.
