N12N6MTFRASE
In prokaryotes, the major role of DNA methylation is to protect host
DNA against degradation by restriction enzymes. There are 2 major classes
of DNA methyltransferase that differ in the nature of the modifications
they effect [1]. The members of one class (C-MTases) methylate a ring
carbon and form C5-methylcytosine (see PRINTS signature C5METTRFRASE).
Members of the second class (N-MTases) methylate exocyclic nitrogens and
form either N4-methylcytosine (N4-MTases) or N6-methyladenine (N6-MTases).
Both classes of MTase utilise the cofactor S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM)
as the methyl donor and are active as monomeric enzymes [1].

The structure of N6-MTase TaqI (M.TaqI) has been resolved to 2.4A [2].
The molecule folds into 2 domains: an N-terminal catalytic domain, which
contains the catalytic and cofactor binding sites, and comprises a central
9-stranded beta-sheet, surrounded by 5 helices; and a C-terminal DNA
recognition domain, which is formed by 4 small beta-sheets and 8 alpha-
helices. The N- and C-terminal domains form a cleft that accommodates the
DNA substrate.

A classification of N-MTases has been proposed, based on conserved motif
(CM) arrangements [3]. According to this classification, N6-MTases that
have an NPPY motif (CM II) occuring after the FxGxG motif (CM I) are
designated N12 class N6-adenine MTases.

N12N6MTFRASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
N12 class N6-adenine MTases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 15 sequences. The motifs were drawn from some of the conserved
regions used by Timinskas et al. [3] in their DNA MTase classification:
the motifs correspond to CM Is, I, II and III, respectively - motif 2,
which contains the pattern Pxx(AG)xG, forms part of the cofactor (SAM)
binding site (loop beta 1 - helix A in the M.TaqI structure); motif 3, 
which contains the N-MTase-specific tetrapeptide NPP(FWY) (cf. PROSITE
pattern N6_MTASE), is important for methylation [4] (loop beta 4 - helix D);
and motif 4 corresponds to helix D and strand 5. Four iterations on OWL28.0
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 31
sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also found: G64114 is
a Haemophilus influenzae MTase M.EcoR124/3 (named by homology with the
E.coli enzyme) that lacks motif 3; and S49395 (Mycoplasma pulmonis M.HsdM1)
and MAMAMIRM (Microbacterium ammoniaphilum M.MamI) are N12 class N6-adenine
MTases that lack motif 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 64 sequences, and 25
partial matches.
