CHAPERONIN10
The assembly of proteins has been thought to be the sole result of 
properties inherent in the primary sequence of polypeptides themselves. 
In some cases, however, structural information from other protein molecules
is required for correct folding and subsequent assembly into oligomers [1].
These 'helper' molecules are referred to as molecular chaperones, a 
subfamily of which are the chaperonins [2], which include 10kDa and 60kDa
proteins. These are required for normal cell growth (as demonstrated by 
the fact that no temperature sensitive mutants for the chaperonin genes 
can be found in the temperature range 20 to 43 degrees centigrade [1]), 
and are stress-induced, acting to stabilise or protect disassembled 
polypeptides under heat-shock conditions [2].

The 10kDa chaperonin (cpn10 - or groES in bacteria) exists as a ring-
shaped oligomer of between 6 to 8 identical subunits, while the 60kDa 
chaperonin (cpn60 - or groEL in bacteria) forms a structure comprising 2 
stacked rings, each ring containing 7 identical subunits [1]. These ring 
structures assemble by self-stimulation in the presence of Mg2+-ATP. The 
cpn10 and cpn60 oligomers also require Mg2+-ATP in order to interact to 
form a functional complex, although the mechanism of this interaction is 
as yet unknown [3]. This chaperonin complex is essential for the correct 
folding and assembly of polypeptides into oligomeric structures, of which 
the chaperonins themselves are not a part [2]. The binding of cpn10 to 
cpn60 inhibits the weak ATPase activity of cpn60.

Recently, E.coli GroES was also shown to bind ATP cooperatively, and 
with an affinity comparable to that of GroEL [4]. ATP binding to GroES may
be important in charging the 7 subunits of the interacting GroEL ring
with ATP, to facilitate cooperative ATP binding and hydrolysis for 
substrate protein release.

CHAPERONIN10 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
10kDa chaperonins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length, motif 1 including the N-terminal region encoded by
PROSITE pattern CHAPERONINS_CPN10 (PS00681), and motif 3 containing a
conserved Tyr residue (Tyr-71 in E.coli GroES) known to be close to the 
purine ring of the bound nucleotide [4]. Two iterations on OWL19.0 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 31
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, a putative
chaperonin homologue that fails to match the first motif.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 96 sequences.
