CHOLNESTRASE
Group B carboxylesterases constitute a family of enzymes that includes
proteins that catalyse the conversion of an acylcholine to a choline and
a weak acid:
	    Acylcholine + H(2)O -> Choline + COO(-)

and those that catalyse the hydrolysis of acetylcholine to choline and 
acetate (acetylcholinesterases):

           Acetylcholine + H(2)O -> Choline + Acetate 
     
Acetylcholinesterase also acts on a variety of acetic esters and catalyses
transacetylations. It is found in, or attached to, cellular or basement
membranes of presynaptic cholinergic neurons and postsynaptic cholinoceptive
cells. To prevent continuous firing of nerve impulses, acetylcholinesterase 
has a high K(cat) (~14000/s), to ensure that acetylcholine is broken down
quickly.

Cholinesterases themselves constitute a family of enzymes that fall into 
two main types, depending on their substrate preference: enzymes that 
preferentially hydrolyse acetyl esters are termed acetylcholinesterase
(AChE) (EC 3.1.1.7); and those that prefer other types of ester, such as
butyrylcholine are termed butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) (EC 3.1.1.8). 

The 3D structure of acetylcholinesterase from the electric ray has been
determined. The fold belongs to the alpha/beta class, with a 3-layer
alpha-beta-alpha sandwich architecture.

CHOLNESTRASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cholinesterase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved sections 
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes helix 2;
motif 2 spans the N-terminus of strand 7, helices 3 and 4, and the
N-terminus of strand 8; motif 3 includes helix 15; motif 4 spans the
C-terminus of helix 18 and the N-terminus of helix 19, which includes a
Cys residue involved in disulphide bond formation; motif 5 encodes helix 20;
and motif 6 spans helices 21 and 22. Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 23 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, two of which are foetal
proteins, and the rest are fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 26 sequences, and 1
partial match.
