TAGLIPASE
Triglyceride lipases (EC 3.1.1.3) are lipolytic enzymes that hydrolyse
ester linkages of triglycerides [1]. Lipases are widely distributed in
animals, plants and prokaryotes. At least three tissue-specific isozymes
exist in higher vertebrates: pancreatic, hepatic and gastric/lingual. These
lipases are closely related to each other and to lipoprotein lipase
(EC 3.1.1.34), which hydrolyses triglycerides of chylomicrons and very
low density lipoproteins (VLDL) [2].

The 3D structure of human pancreatic lipase has been determined by X-ray
crystallography [3]. The enzyme is a single-chain glycoprotein of 449 amino 
acids. Structural results suggest that Ser 152 is the nucleophilic residue
essential for catalysis [4]. The residue is located in the N-terminal domain
at the C-terminal edge of a doubly-wound parallel beta-sheet, and forms part
of an Asp-His-Ser triad that is chemically analogous to, but structurally
different from, that of the serine proteases [3]. The putative hydrolytic
site is covered by a surface loop, and is thus inaccessible to solvent. 
It is thought that interfacial activation may involve a reorientation of
this flap, not only in pancreatic lipases but also in the related hepatic
and lipoprotein lipases [3]. 

TAGLIPASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
triacylglycerol lipase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the first
alpha-helix 1 and beta-strand 5; motif 2 includes helix 2; motif 3 spans
the C-terminal half of strand 6 and helix 3, leading into helix 4; motif 4
includes the rest of helix 4; motif 5 spans strand 7 and helix 6; motif 6
encompasses helix 12; motif 7 includes the C-terminus of helix 13; motif 8
includes strand 13; and motif 9 spans strands 16 and 17. Two iterations on
OWL30.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 32 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are fragments or related phospholipase sequences that
fail to match one or more motifs (those matching 2 motifs belong to the
vespid venom phospholipase A1 family).

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 30 sequences, and 7
partial matches.
