PANCHORMONE
The dominant endocrine cell type of the duodenal pancreas is the pancreatic
polypeptide cell, which secretes pancreatic polypeptide, a hormone involved
in the regulation of biliary tract motility, and of zymogen secretion from
the exocrine pancreas [1]. The hormone is produced as a larger propeptide,
which is enzymatically cleaved to yield the mature active peptide: this is
36 amino acids in length [2] and has an amidated C-terminus [3]. The
hormone has a globular structure, residues 2-8 forming a left-handed poly-
proline-II-like helix, residues 9-13 a beta turn, and 14-32 an alpha-helix,
held close to the first helix by hydrophobic interactions [2]. Unlike
glucagon, another peptide hormone, the structure of pancreatic peptide is
preserved in aqueous solution [4]. Both N- and C-termini are required for
activity: receptor binding and activation functions may reside in the N-
and C-termini respectively [2].

Further peptide hormones have been identified that are similar to 
pancreatic polypeptide in both sequence and structure, including neuro-
peptide tyrosine (often call neuropeptide Y) and peptide YY. Neuropeptide
Y, which is widely distributed in the central and peripheral nervous
systems, is implicated in the control of feeding, and secretion of gonado-
trophin-releasing hormone [2]. Peptide YY, a gut protein, inhibits exocrine
pancreatic secretion, can cause vasoconstriction, and affects jejunal and
colonic mobility [4].

PANCHORMONE is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
pancreatic polypeptides. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the full alignment
length - motif 1 spans the polyproline-II-like helix, the beta turn and
part of the alpha-helix, and motif 2 includes the remaining portion of the
alpha-helix and the 5 conserved C-terminal residues encoded by PROSITE
pattern PANCREATIC_HORMONE (PS00265). Three iterations on OWL22.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 47
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 50 sequences.
