PROLIGOPTASE
Proteolytic enzymes that use serine in their catalytic machinery are 
widespread and numerous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes
[1]. They encompass a range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase,
endopeptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase. More than 20 serine
protease families (denoted S1 - S27) have been identified, which have been
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
and functional similarities [1]. Structures from four clans have been
examined (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be unrelated, suggesting at 
least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidase, and possibly many more
[1]. Since that examination, structural representations from the other two 
clan members (SF, SG) have been determined [3].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

Prolyl oligopeptidases belong to the S9A family of the carboxypeptidase (SC)
clan [1,3]. The active site of members of this clan consists of a linear 
arrangment of serine, histidine and threonine catalytic residues [1]. Prolyl
oligopeptidases are either located in the cytosol or they are membrane bound,
where they cleave peptide bonds with prolyl P1 specificities (but cleavage
of alanyl bonds has been detected). The proline must adopt a trans con-
figuration within the chain. Peptides of up to 30 residues are cleaved [1].

PROLIGOPTASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
prolyl oligopeptidase (S9A) family of serine proteases. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment -
motifs 3 and 4 overlap the region encoded by PROSITE pattern PRO_ENDOPEP_SER
(PS00708), which contains the catalytic serine; and motif 6 encodes the
catalytic aspartate. Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 19 sequences was found.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 19 sequences.
