LYSYLOXIDASE
Lysyl oxidase (LOX) is an extracellular enzyme involved in the maturation
of collagen and elastin [1] - it is responsible for post-translational
oxidative deamination of peptidyl lysine residues in fibrous collagen and
elastin precursors. The enzyme exploits a copper cofactor in a reaction
that catalyses the formation of aldehyde cross-links: 
peptidyl-L-lysyl-peptide + H2O + O2 = peptidyl-allysyl-peptide + NH3 + H2O2

The amino acid sequences of human and rat LOX have been compared with the
mouse ras recision gene (RRG) product [3]. The proteins demonstrate a
high degree of similarity, but the level of conservation is not evenly
distributed along the molecule [3]: the N-terminus is less well conserved
than the C-terminus, which contains the putative copper-binding sites and
is probably the catalytic domain. LOX binds a single copper atom via an
octahedral co-ordination complex that includes several histidine ligands.
Four His residues, thought to be involved in copper binding, are clustered
in a central region of the enzyme that has been termed the 'copper talon'.

The high degree of similarity between the RRG and LOX proteins suggests
that they are the same gene product and, hence, in addition to cross-
linking of extracellular matrix proteins, LOX may have a direct role in
tumour suppression [3]. 

Defects in LOX has been found in three X-linked recessive human connective
tissue disorders: cutis laxa (formerly Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IX),
Menkes syndrome, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type V (EDS-V).

LYSYLOXIDASE is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
lysyl oxidase. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the 
C-terminal half of the alignment: motif 1 lies in a low-complexity region
in the central portion of the alignment; and motifs 4 and 5, which include
the region encoded by PROSITE pattern LYSYL_OXIDASE (PS00926), span the
copper talon. A single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Two partial matches were found: Q08397 is a protein-lysine oxidase homologue
precursor from Homo sapiens that fails to match motif 10; and Q9Z175 is a
murine lysyl oxidase-related protein that fails to match motifs 1, 3 and 10.
