HIGHMOBLTYIY
Members of the high mobility group HMG-I(Y) family of mammalian non-histone
proteins have been shown to bind specifically to the minor groove of 
A.T-rich sequences and to function as gene transcriptional regulatory 
proteins in vivo [1,2]. The human HMG-I(Y) gene has several potential 
promoter/enhancer regions, a number of different transcription start sites
and numerous alternatively-spliced exons, making it one of the most complex
non-histone chromatin protein-encoding genes reported to date [2]. 

Sequence analysis has shown that alternative splicing of precursor mRNAs
gives rise to the major HMG-I and HMG-Y isoforms found in human cells. Each
of the three different DNA-binding domain peptides present in an individual
HMG-I(Y) protein is coded for by sequences present on separate exons, 
suggesting exon 'shuffling' of these functional domains during evolution 
[2]. The gene has been localised to the short arm of chromosome 6 in a 
region known to be involved in rearrangements, translocations and other 
abnormalities associated with human cancers [2]. 

HMG-I and HMG-Y are relatively short alternatively spliced forms containing
~100 residues (HMG-Y differs from HMG-I by the internal deletion of 11 amino
acids). The proteins preferentially bind to double-stranded DNA via an
11-residue domain known as an A.T-hook [1]. The hook domain is repeated
three times in the sequence of HMG-I/Y.

HIGHMOBLTYIY is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
HMG-I/HMG-Y family of high mobility group proteins. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from short conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length -
motif 1 encodes the first hook domain; motifs 2 and 3 span the second hook
region; motif 4 spans the third hook domain and includes the region encoded
by PROSITE pattern HMGI_Y (PS00354); and motif 5 encodes a C-terminal
acidic region. A single iteration on OWL30.2 was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Several partial matches were also found, all of which are HMG homologues or
DNA-binding proteins that match the hook domains. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 7 sequences, and 9
partial matches.
