MTVERTEBRATE
Metallothioneins (MT) are small proteins that bind heavy metals, such as
zinc, copper, cadmium, nickel, etc.. They have a high content of cysteine
residues that bind the metal ions through clusters of thiolate bonds [1-3]
(http://www.unizh.ch/~mtpage/MT.html). An empirical classification into
three classes has been proposed by Fowler et al. [4] and Kojima [5]. Members
of class I are defined to include polypeptides related in the positions of
their cysteines to equine MT-1B, and include mammalian MTs as well as MTs 
from crustaceans and molluscs. Class II groups MTs from a variety of 
species, including sea urchins, fungi, insects and cyanobacteria. Class
III MTs are atypical polypeptides composed of gamma-glutamylcysteinyl
units [4]. 

This original classification system has been found to be limited, in the
sense that it does not allow clear differentiation of patterns of structural
similarities, either between or within classes. Consequently, all class I
and class II MTs (the proteinaceous sequences) have now been grouped into
families of phylogenetically-related and thus alignable sequences [6]
(http://www.unizh.ch/~mtpage/classif.html). This system subdivides the MT
superfamily into families, subfamilies, subgroups, and isolated isoforms
and alleles. 

The metallothionein superfamily comprises all polypeptides that resemble
equine renal metallothionein in several respects [4]: e.g., low molecular
weight; high metal content; amino acid composition with high Cys and low
aromatic residue content; unique sequence with characteristic distribution
of cysteines, and spectroscopic manifestations indicative of metal thiolate
clusters. A MT family subsumes MTs that share particular sequence-specific 
features and are thought to be evolutionarily related. The inclusion of a
MT within a family presupposes that its amino acid sequence is alignable 
with that of all members. Fifteen MT families have been characterised, each
family being identified by its number and its taxonomic range: e.g., Family
1: vertebrate MTs. 

Vertebrate family 1 MTs are 60-68 residue proteins, in which 19 totally-
conserved cysteines bind 7 bivalent metal ions. The protein comprises two
structural domains (designated alpha and beta), which contain 9 and 11
cysteines that bind 3 and 4 bivalent metal ions, respectively. There are 7
metal-binding sites, denoted CD1-CD7, each comprising several Cys residues.

MTVERTEBRATE is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
family 1 metallothioneins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length and encode a number of
residues involved in metal binding - motif 1 lies in the beta domain and
includes Cys residues involved in the CD3 and CD4 metal-binding sites;
motif 2, which spans the alpha and beta domains, includes part of the first 
alpha-helix and the CD2, CD3, CD5 and CD7 sites (motifs 1 and 2 span the
region encoded by the PROSITE pattern METALLOTHIONEIN_VRT (PS00203)); and
motif 3 lies in the alpha domain, spanning the second helix - it includes
the CD1, CD5, CD6 and CD7 sites. Two iterations on OWL30.0 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was
identified. Five partial matches were also found, all of which are fragments
that lack either the first or the last motif.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 78 sequences.
