ANNEXINVI
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster,
Xenopus laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and
Neurospora crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from
those found in other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino-acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium-binding sites are found in
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity, exo-
cytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the extra-
cellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA replication
[2]. Type VI annexin may also play a part in the regulation of some calcium
channels, and its presence may cause arrest of cell growth, before the
DNA-replication stage, in cells growing at low serum concentrations. This
annexin class is unusual in containing 8 repeats of the conserved domain
rather than 4: hence, it is likely that the protein has arisen from a 
gene-duplication event.

ANNEXIN VI is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type VI 
annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full 
alignment length, focusing on those areas that characterise type VI 
annexins but distinguish them from other closely related annexin subtypes - 
motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 resides in the first repeat; motif
3 lies in the second repeat; and motifs 4 and 5 reside between the fourth
and fifth repeats. Two iterations on SPTR41_24f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified.
