MUSCARINICR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, present in the central nervous
system, spinal cord motoneurons and autonomic preganglia, modulate a
variety of physiological functions: these include airway, eye and intestinal
smooth muscle contractions; heart rate; and glandular secretions. The
receptors mediate adenylate cyclase attenuation, calcium and potassium
channel activation, and phosphatidyl inositol turnover [6]. This diversity
may result from the occurrence of multiple receptor subtypes, which have
been classified based on observed differences in ligand binding to
receptors in membranes from several tissues.

MUSCARINICR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
muscarinic receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the muscarinic receptors but distinguish them from the rest
of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies in the N-terminal portion
of TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 1 and part of the
first cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 lies at the C-terminus of TM domain 2;
motif 4 lies at the N-terminus of TM domain 3; motif 5 spans the second
cytoplasmic loop; motif 6 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 4 and part of
the second external loop; motif 7 spans part of the second external loop
leading into TM domain 5; motif 8 spans the third external loop; and motif
9 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 7 leading into the C-terminus. Two
iterations on OWL23.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 23 sequences was identfied. Several partial matches
were also found, all of which are members of the superfamily.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 23 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
