SH2DOMAIN
The SH2 (src Homology-2) domains are small protein modules containing
approximately 100 amino acid residues. They are found in a wide variety of
protein contexts: e.g., in association with catalytic domains of phospho-
lipase Cy (PLCy) and the nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases; within
structural proteins such as fodrin and tensin; and in a group of small 
adaptor molecules, i.e Crk and Nck. In many cases, when an SH2 domain is
present so too is an SH3 domain, suggesting that their functions are 
inter-related. The domains are frequently found as repeats in a single
protein sequence. 

The structure of the SH2 domain belongs to the alpha+beta class, its
overall shape forming a compact flattened hemisphere. The core structural
elements comprise a central hydrophobic anti-parallel beta-sheet, flanked
by 2 short alpha-helices. In the v-src oncogene product SH2 domain, the
loop between strands 2 and 3 provides many of the binding interactions
with the phosphate group of its phosphopeptide ligand, and is hence
designated the phosphate binding loop. 

SH2DOMAIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for SH2
domains. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 21
sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length, and largely correspond to the core structural
elements (i.e., the N-terminal helix, each of the central 3 strands, and
the C-terminal helix respectively) - motif 2 contains a highly conserved
FLVRES sequence involved in phosphate binding (cf. PROSITE profile SH2
(PS50001)). Five iterations on OWL26.2 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 187 sequences was identified. Thirty-
nine partial matches were also found (the fingerprint does not perform
perfectly because of the low level of sequence similarity between SH2
domains (the result of their disparate functions), and is further
complicated by their multiple repeat nature). 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 162 sequences, and 143
partial matches.
