ACTROPHINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH), melanocyte-stimulating hormones and beta-
endorphin are peptide products of pituitary pro-opiomelanocortin. ACTH 
regulates synthesis and release of glucocorticoids and aldosterone in
the adrenal cortex; it also has a trophic action on these cells [6]. 
ACTH and beta-endorphin are synthesised and released in response to 
corticotrophin-releasing factor at times of stress (heat, cold, infections,
etc.) - their release leads to increased metabolism and analgesia res..
The ACTH receptor is found in high levels in the adrenal cortex - binding
sites are present in lower levels in the CNS. 

ACTROPHINR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
adrenocorticotrophin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections   
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the ACTH receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the melanocortin receptors - motifs 1 and 2 were drawn
from the N-terminal region preceding TM domain 1; motif 3 spans the first
external loop; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 4 and the second
external loop; motif 5 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 6
resides in the C-terminal region following TM domain 7. A single iteration
on OWL27.1 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identfied beyond the starting set. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences, and 1
partial match.
