LVIRUSORF5
The nucleotide sequence of the RNA of potato leafroll luteovirus (PLRV) has
been determined [1,2]. The sequence contains six large ORFs. The 3' coding 
region encodes three polypeptides: a 23K coat protein, a 17K polypeptide
encoded in a different frame, and a 53K polypeptide, immediately following
the coat protein sequence in the same frame. It has been suggested that the
53K polypeptide is translated by readthrough of the amber termination codon
of the coat protein gene. The amino acid sequences encoded within the 3'
region show many similarities to analogous polypeptides of barley yellow
dwarf virus, PAV strain (BYDV), and beet western yellows virus (BWYV). 
It is possible that the ORF5 protein is a VPG-precursor from which, at the
onset of RNA synthesis, the VPG molecule is released, in a similar fashion
to that proposed for cowpea mosaic virus.

Barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) can be separated into two groups based 
on serological relationships, presumably governed by the viral capsid 
structure [3]. Coding regions of coat proteins have been identified for the
MAV-PS1, P-PAV (group 1) and NY-RPV (group 2) isolates of BYDV. Group 1 
proteins show 71% sequence similarity to each other, 51% similarity to those
of group 2, and a high degree of similarity to those from other luteoviruses
(including coat proteins from beet western yellow virus (BWYV) [4] and 
potato leafroll virus (PLRV) [2,5]). 

LVIRUSORF5 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
luteovirus ORF5 VPG proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 12 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length. Two iterations on OWL30.1
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 
16 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found: V16K_BLRV
is a bean leafroll virus ORF2 protein that matches motifs 3-6; and VPG_BYDVP
is a barley yellow dwarf VPG protein that matches motifs 1 and 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 16 sequences, and 1
partial match.
