INTERLEUKIN8
The accumulation of neutrophil leukocytes in tissues is a major event in 
inflammation, a defensive reaction in response to injury or infection [1].
Neutrophils are drawn in from the blood by chemotactic signals that
direct their migration to the affected site [1]. Interleukin-8 (IL8) is one
such chemotactic protein: it is released by phagocytes, mesenchymal cells
and a wide variety of tissue cells, upon exposure to inflammation [1]; and
it acts as a neutrophil-activating cytokine, inducing chemotaxis, exo-
cytosis, and the respiratory burst [1].

IL8 contains 4 cysteines, the first 2 separated by a single amino acid: as
such, it is a member of the intercrine alpha family (also known as small
cytokine CxC or chemokine CxC), a group of low molecular weight proteins
that induce various cells in response to a variety of stimuli [1]. The
mature protein is produced by cleavage of an N-terminal signal sequence
[1,2], and exists in vivo as a homodimer [1,3]. 

Each monomer has a short, conformationally-flexible N-terminal domain,  
anchored by 2 disulphide bonds to a core fold containing a 3-stranded
anti-parallel beta-sheet and a C-terminal alpha-helix [1]. The dimer
has 2 alpha-helices (one from each monomer) lying atop a 6-stranded
anti-parallel beta-sheet platform [3]. The 2 helices may form the binding
site for the cellular receptor, and specificity for IL8, or other family
members, may be achieved by the distinct distribution of charged and polar
residues at the surface of the helices [3].

INTERLEUKIN8 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
interleukin-8 cytokines. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 encodes the signal sequence;
motif 2 lies in the flexible N-terminal region; motif 3 spans the first and
second beta-strands; and motif 4 spans the third beta-strand and the
C-terminal helix (motifs 2-4 include the region encoded by PROSITE pattern 
SMALL_CYTOKINES_CXC (PS00471)). Two iterations on OWL26.3 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 10 sequences was
identified. Twenty partial matches were also found, all of which are
small CxC cytokines, which lack the N-terminal signal sequence.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 31 sequences, and 11
partial matches.
