SIGMA54FCT
Sigma factors are bacterial transcription factors that promote the binding 
of RNA polymerase to promoters containing their recognition sites. This 
binding is facilitated by 2 leucine zipper regions [1], which help to
position the polymerase-sigma factor complex over the correct DNA region.
This region is then 'melted' by the acidic domain of the sigma factor,
allowing transcription to take place.

Most bacteria express a multiplicity of sigma factors. Two of these,
sigma-70 (generally known as the major or primary sigma factor) and 
sigma-54, direct the transcription of a wide variety of genes: the others
(known as alternative sigma factors) are required for the transcription of 
specific subsets of genes. 

Sigma-54 differs from sigma-70 in that it allows regulation of gene
expression by remotely-bound enhancer molecules upstream from the promoter.
These enhancers are often phosphorylated by a sensor protein before they
can activate transcription. Binding of the enhancers activates the pre-
bound polymerase-sigma factor complex, which then 'melts' the DNA at the
transcriptional start site, allowing transcriptional activation. Thus the
RNA polymerase-sigma-54 complex acts as a receptor complex for receipt of
the melting signal from the remotely-bound activator.

Genes that are activated by sigma-54 are, in general, involved in nitrogen
source assimilation [2] in Gram-negative bacteria, although genes involved
in forming the structure of flagellae [3] and degradation of toluene and
xylenes [4] have also been found to require the presence of sigma-54. The
main feature of these genes is that they lack the usual -10 and -35
sequences recognised by factor 70, but have strongly conserved -12 and
-24 sequences.

SIGMA54FCT is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
sigma-54 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: motif 2 spans the ATP-binding region (the so-called P-loop)
(cf. PROSITE pattern SIGMA54_1 (PS00717)), and motif 4 encodes a second
ATP-binding region (cf. PROSITE pattern SIGMA54_2 (PS00718)). Two
iterations on OWL19.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 16 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found that lack matches with motif 3. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 34 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
