CRBOXYPTASET
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship[1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1,2].

Carboxypeptidase Taq is a zinc-containing thermostable metallopeptidase that
belongs to the M32 family [3]. It does not share any significant sequence
similarity with other carboypeptidases or metalloproteases, so has not been
assigned to a clan. It was originally discovered and purified from Thermus
aquaticus; optimal enzymatic activity occurs at 80 celcius. Although very
little is known about this enzyme, it is thought either to be associated 
with a membrane or to be particle bound [4].

CRBOXYPTASET is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the thermostable carboxypeptidase Taq (M32) family of metallopeptidases.
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the
motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually the full 
alignment length - motif 4 includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern 
ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142), which describes the HEXXH active site. A single 
iteration on OWL31.1 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences
being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences.
