RDC1ORPHANR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Several 7TM receptors have been cloned but their endogenous ligands are
unknown; these have been termed orphan receptors. Canine RDC1 receptors
were first characterised by Libert et al. as belonging to a new subfamily
of receptors with a short non-glycosylated (extracellular) N-terminal
extension [6]. The human homologue of RDC1 was originally believed to code
for a VIP receptor [7], but this is no longer thought to be correct [8].

RDC1ORPHANR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
RDC1 orphan receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the RDC1 receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie at
the N-terminus; motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans the
first external loop; motif 5 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 6
and 7 span the second external loop; motif 8 spans the third cytoplasmic
loop; and motif 9 resides at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL29.0
was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified
beyond the starting set. A single partial match was also found, HSU67784,
a human RDC1 fragment.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
