HEMAGGLUTN1
The haemagglutinin (HA) glycoprotein of influenza is a trimer containing 
three structurally distinct regions: a globular head of anti-parallel 
beta-sheet, which contains the receptor binding site and the variable
antigenic determinants (antigenic variation in haemagglutinin is
associated with recurrent epidemics of respiratory diseases in man); a
triple-stranded, coiled-coil, alpha-helical stalk; and a globular foot of
anti-parallel beta-sheet [1-4]. 

The structural domains of haemagglutinin are arranged broadly as follows:
a large globular, hydrophilic, carbohydrate-containing domain resides on 
the external suface of the membrane; a small, uncharged hydrophobic peptide
spans the membrane; and a smaller globular, hydrophilic domain resides on
the inside of the membrane. Each monomer in the structure comprises two
disulphide-linked chains, HA1 and HA2. The N-terminus of HA1 provides a 
central strand in the 5-stranded globular foot, the chain then making its
way to the globular head, where it forms an 8-stranded Swiss-roll. HA2
provides two alpha-helices, which form part of the fibrous structure
(three helices, one from each monomer, pack together as the triple-stranded
coiled-coil that stablises the trimer), its C-terminus providing the
remaining strands of the 5-stranded globular foot.

HEMAGGLUTN1 is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
the haemagglutinin HA1 chain. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: motif 1 encodes the N-terminal beta-strand that
forms part of the 5-stranded globular foot; motifs 2-4 encode alpha-
helices; motifs 5 and 6 span three beta-strands; and motifs 7 and 8 span a
well-conserved C-terminal region. Two iterations on OWL23.0 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 199 sequences
was identified. Twenty one partial matches were also found, most of which
are haemagglutinin fragments that match motifs 1 and 2, or motifs 7 and 8.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 185 sequences.
