AMINO1PTASE
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship[1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1,2].

Aminopeptidase I is a metallopeptidase that belongs to the M18 protease
family, which is part of the MH clan [1,3]. Proteins of this clan have two
catalytic zinc ions at the active site, bound by His/Asp, Asp, Glu, Asp/Glu
and His. The catalysed reaction involves the release of an N-terminal amino-
acid, usually neutral or hydrophobic, from a polypeptide. 

The yeast sequence has been deduced, and the mature protein shown to consist
of 469 amino acids [4]. A 45-residue presequence contains both positively-
and negatively-charged and hydrophobic residues, which could be arranged 
in an N-terminal amphiphilic alpha-helix [4]. The presequence differs from
signal sequences that direct proteins across bacterial plasma membranes and
endoplasmic reticulum or into mitochondria. It is unclear how this unique
presequence targets aminopeptidase I to yeast vacuoles, and how this
sorting utilises classical protein secretory pathways [4]. 

AMINO1PTASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
aminopeptidase I family of zinc metalloproteases (M18). The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full length of the mature
protein. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 10 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 9 sequences.
