XRODRMPGMNTG
Defects in DNA repair proteins can give rise, in humans, to the autosomal
recessive disorders xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) and Cockayne's syndrome [1,2].
XP is characterised by a high incidence of sunlight-induced skin cancer,
the effect of skin-cell hypersensitivity to UV resulting from defects in
the nucleotide excision pathway. Seven XP complementation groups have
been identified: XP-A to XP-G. 

XP-G is one of the most rare and phenotypically heterogeneous of XP, showing
anything from slight to extreme dysfunction in DNA excision repair [3,4].
XP-G can be corrected by a 133kDa nuclear protein, XPGC [1]. XPGC is an
acidic protein that confers normal UV resistance in expressing cells [4]. 
It is a magnesium-dependent, single-strand DNA endonuclease that makes
structure-specific endonucleolytic incisions in a DNA substrate containing
a duplex region and single-stranded arms [4,5]. XPGC cleaves one strand of
the duplex at the border with the single-stranded region [5].

XPG belongs to a family of proteins that includes RAD2 from budding yeast
and rad13 from fission yeast, which are single-stranded DNA endonucleases
[5,6]; mouse and human FEN-1, a structure-specific endonuclease; RAD2 from 
fission yeast and RAD27 from budding yeast; fission yeast exo1, a 5'->3'
double-stranded DNA exonuclease that may act in a pathway that corrects
mismatched base pairs; yeast DHS1 and yeast DIN7.

Sequence analysis reveals that similarities within the family are largely
confined to two well-conserved domains, the first of which is located at 
the N-terminal extremity (the N-region), the second lying towards the
C-terminus (the I-region). The I-region contains a perfectly conserved
hexapeptide, EAEAQC, the Glu and Cys residues of which may be involved in
the excision repair mechanism.

XRODRMPGMNTG is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
xeroderma pigmentosum group G complementation proteins. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved sections spanning virtually the full alignment length,
focusing on those regions that characterise group G proteins but distinguish
them from the rest of the XPG family - motifs 1 and 2 reside in the N-domain;
motifs 3-8 span the central region; and motifs 9 and 10 reside in the 
C-terminal domain. A single iteration on OWL30.0 was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
A single partial match was also found, RA13_SCHPO, a related DNA repair
protein (RAD13) from S.pombe.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
