CYTOCHROMEF
The cytochrome b6f integral membrane protein complex transfers electrons 
between the two reaction center complexes of oxygenic photosynthetic 
membranes, and participates in formation of the transmembrane 
electrochemical proton gradient by also transferring protons from the 
stromal to the internal lumen compartment [1]. The cytochrome b6f complex 
contains four polypeptides: cytochrome f (285 aa); cytochrome b6 (215 aa); 
Rieske iron-sulphur protein (179 aa); and subunit IV (160 aa) [2]. In its 
structure and functions, the cytochrome b6f complex bears extensive analogy
to the cytochrome bc1 complex of mitochondria and photosynthetic purple 
bacteria; cytochrome f (cyt f) plays a role analogous to that of cytochrome
c1, in spite of their different structures [3]. 

The 3D structure of turnip cyt f has been determined [4]. The lumen-side 
segment of cyt f includes two structural domains: a small one above a 
larger one that, in turn, is on top of the attachment to the membrane 
domain. The large domain consists of an anti-parallel beta-sandwich and a 
short haem-binding peptide, which form a three-layer structure. The small 
domain is inserted between beta-strands F and G of the large domain and is 
an all-beta domain. The haem nestles between two short helices at the 
N-terminus of cyt f. Within the second helix is the sequence motif for the 
c-type cytochromes, CxxCH (residues 21-25), which is covalently attached to
the haem through thioether bonds to Cys-21 and Cys-24. His-25 is the fifth 
haem iron ligand. The sixth haem iron ligand is the alpha-amino group of 
Tyr-1 in the first helix [4]. Cyt f has an internal network of water 
molecules that may function as a proton wire [4]. The water chain appears
to be a conserved feature of cyt f. 

CYTOCHROMEF is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for cyt f.
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the
motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually the full
alignment length - motif 1 spans the C-terminal portion of the signal 
sequence and helix A, in which the alpha-amino group of the Tyr serves the
sixth haem iron ligand; motif 2 encompasses helix B, which includes two 
invariant Cys residues, which covalently bind the haem group, and a His 
residue, which provides the fifth haem iron ligand (cf. PROSITE pattern 
CYTOCHROME_C); motifs 3 and 4 span beta-strands A and B; motif 5 spans
strands C and D; motif 6 includes helix C and strand C''; motif 7 spans
strands C' and E; motif 8 includes strand F; motifs 9-11 encompass most of
the small domain, the C-terminal half of motif 11 corresponding to strand G
of the large domain; and motif 13 spans a charge-rich region. Two iterations
on OWL28.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 20 sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 23 sequences.
