HGSCAVENGER
Proteins that transport heavy metals in micro-organisms and mammals share
similarities in their sequences and structures. These proteins provide an
important focus for research, some being involved in bacterial resistance
to toxic metals, such as lead and cadmium, while others are involved in
inherited human syndromes, such as Wilson and Menkes diseases [1].

A conserved 30-residue domain has been found in a number of these heavy
metal transport or detoxification proteins [1]. The domain, which has been
termed Heavy-Metal-Associated (HMA), contains two conserved cysteines that
are probably involved in metal binding. 

The HMA domain has been identified in the N-terminal regions of a variety
of cation transporting ATPases, and in other ATPases such as fixI from 
Rhizobium meliloti; pacS from Synechococcus strain PCC 7942; Mycobacterium 
leprae ctpA and ctpB; and Escherichia coli hypothetical protein yhhO. In
addition, the domain has been found in bacterial mercuric reductase; the
copP copper-binding protein of Helicobacter pylori; and in the N-terminal 
regions of mercuric transport protein periplasmic component (gene merP) and
plasmids carried by mercury-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, where it seems
to be a mercury scavenger that specifically binds to one Hg(2+) ion, passing
this to mercuric reductase via the merT protein. 

The structure of the mercuric ion-binding protein MerP from Shigella
flexneri has been determined. The fold has been classed as a ferredoxin-like
alpha-beta sandwich, having a beta-alpha beta-beta alpha-beta architecture,
with the two alpha-helices overlaying a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-
sheet [2]. Structural differences between the reduced and mercury-bound 
forms of merP are localised to the metal-binding loop containing the 
consensus sequence GMTCXXC, the two cysteines of which are involved in
bi-coordination of Hg(2+) [2].

HGSCAVENGER is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
mercury scavenger proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 lies at the N-
terminus and spans the signal sequence; motifs 2-4 span the heavy-metal 
binding domain, and include the region encoded by PROSITE pattern HMA 
(PS01047), within which the two Cys residues are involved in metal binding
(motif 2 encodes the first beta-strand, motif 3 includes the first alpha-
helix and motif 4 spans strand 2); and motifs 5 and 6 lie towards the C-
terminus, motif 5 including strand 3, and motif 6 spanning helix 2 and 
strand 4. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, 
at which point a true set comprising 11 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are fragments, or closely-
related class II mercury-binding proteins.


An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 12 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
