BRACHYURY
The T-box gene family is an ancient group of putative transcription
factors that appear to play a critical role in the development of all
animal species.

These genes were uncovered on the basis of similarity to the DNA binding
domain [1] of murine Brachyury (T) gene product, which similarity is the
defining feature of the family. The Brachyury gene is named for its
phenotype, which was identified 70 years ago as a mutant mouse strain with
a short blunted tail. The gene, and its paralogues, have become a well-
studied model for the family, and hence much of what is known about the
T-box family is derived from the murine Brachyury gene.

Consistent with its nuclear location, Brachyury protein has a sequence-
specific DNA-binding activity and can act as a transcriptional regulator
[2]. Homozygous mutants for the gene undergo extensive developmental
anomalies, thus rendering the mutation lethal [3]. The postulated role of
Brachyury is as a transcription factor, regulating the specification and
differentiation of posterior mesoderm during gastrulation in a dose-
dependent manner [1].

Common features shared by T-box family members are, DNA-binding and
transcriptional regulatory activity, a role in development and conserved
expression patterns, most of the known genes in all species being expressed
in mesoderm of mesoderm precursors [4].

BRACHYURY is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
brachyury family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the full alignment length,
including the region characterised as the T-box domain - motif 2 spans
beta-strands 6-8; motif 3 includes strand 13; and motif 4 spans helix 6. 
Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 12 sequences was identified. Several partial
matches were also found: three of these (BRAC_HALRO, S74163 and BYN_DROME)
are brachyury sequences that fail to make significant matches with one or
more motifs; two are fragments (D89442 and SSU91519); and the remaining
two are closely related T-box proteins (TBX6_MOUSE and H15_DROME).

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
