TRNASYNTHLEU
AATRSs catalyse a two-step reaction:

(1) Enzyme + amino acid + ATP ---> Enzyme(aminoacyl-AMP) + PPi

(2) tRNA + Enzyme(aminoacyl-AMP) ---> aminoacyl-tRNA + AMP + Enzyme

In the first step, they form an aminoacyl-adenylate, in which the carboxyl
of the amino acid is linked to the alpha-phosphate of ATP, by displacing
the pyrophosphate. When the correct tRNA is bound, the aminoacyl group is
transferred to the 2'- or 3'-terminal OH of the tRNA at the expense of AMP
[1].

Based on structural and sequence comparisons, this group of at least 20
proteins (in prokaryotes there are approximately 20, but in eukaryotes
there are usually 2 forms for each amino acid; namely, the cytosolic and
mitochondrial forms) can be divided into two classes.

Class I AATRSs contain a characteristic Rossman fold and are mostly
monomeric. At the primary structure level, two highly-conserved motifs
are observed, 'HIGH' and 'KMSKS' [2,3]; these are associated with the ATP-
binding site.

Class II AATRSs share an anti-parallel beta-sheet formation, flanked by
alpha-helices [3], and are mostly dimeric or multimeric.

Further distinction between the two classes is evident when the reaction
mechanisms are investigated. In reactions catalysed by the class I AATRSs,
the aminoacyl group is coupled to the 2'-hydroxyl of the tRNA, while, in
class II reactions, the 3'-hydroxyl site is preferred.

Leucyl-tRNA synthetase (EC 6.1.1.4 ) is specific to leucine and belongs
to class I.

TRNASYNTHLEU is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
leucyl-tRNA synthetases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
within the C-terminal portion of the alignment. Two iterations on 
OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 20 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also 
found: these include a C.elegans cosmid sequence that fails to match motif
4; a leucyl AATRS fragment; and two closely related valyl AATRSs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 19 sequences.
