ALARACEMASE
Alanine racemase catalyses the pyridoxal-dependent conversion of L-alanine
into D-alanine, a key component of bacterial peptidoglycan [1]. In E.coli
and S.typhimurium, there are two alanine racemase isoforms: alr is a
biosynthetic form required for cell wall formation; and dadB functions in
L-alanine catabolism. By contrast with dadB and alr, both of which are
monomeric enzymes, the alanine racemase of Bacillaceae are homodimers. In 
P.putida, a broad-specificity amino acid racemase is structurally and
functionally related to alanine racemase.

The 3D-structure of the dimeric alanine racemase from B.stearothermophilus 
has been determined to a resolution of 1.9A [2]. Each monomer comprises
two domains, with an eight-stranded alpha/beta barrel at the N-terminus, and
a C-terminal beta-strand domain [2]. In the dimer, the mouth of the alpha/
beta barrel of one monomer faces the second domain of the other monomer. 
The pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) cofactor lies in and above the barrel mouth
and is covalently linked via an aldimine linkage to Lys39 [2]. 

Several other residues are involved in anchoring the PLP: for example, 
Arg219 forms a hydrogen bond with the pyridine nitrogen of the cofactor, 
which is assumed to influence electron delocalisation in PLP-alanine
intermediates; Arg136 donates a hydrogen bond to the phenolic oxygen of PLP,
and may be involved in substrate binding and stabilisation of intermediates;
and Tyr265' is postulated to be a 2 proton donor to the carbanion 
intermediate [2]. 

ALARACEMASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for alanine
racemase. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 10 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motif 1 spans strand 2 and helix 2, and includes
the region encoded by PROSITE pattern ALANINE_RACEMASE (PS00395), which 
contains the pyridoxal-P attachment site; motif 2 includes helix 4 and 
strand 4; motifs 3 and 4 encode the C-termini of strands 6 and 7 res., motif
3 including the conserved Arg136; motif 5 spans helices 10-12 and strand 9,
and includes Arg219; motif 6 spans strands 12-13 and helix 14, and includes
Tyr265; motif 7 encodes the C-terminal portion of strand 14, helix 15 and
the N-terminus of helix 16; motif 8 spans strands 15 and 16; and motif 9
encodes helix 18. Three iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 19 sequences was 
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are 
homologues or fragments that fail to match three or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
