POAALLERGEN
Grass pollen allergens are one of the major causes of type I allergies
(including allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, allergic bronchial asthma and
hayfever), afflicting 15-20% of a genetically predisposed population [1].
The amino acid sequences of three Kentucky bluegrass (KBG, Poa pratensis)
pollen allergen cDNA clones (KBG 41, 60 and 31), have been determined [1].
The clones exhibit a high degree of sequence similarity to one another,
minor similarity to other known allergens, and no similarity to other
known proteins or genes. The predicted molecular masses of the proteins
range from 28.3 to 37.8kDa [1]. Northern analysis indicates that expression
of the genes is confined to pollen tissue. The results suggest that the
clones code for a group of proteins that represent a new and previously 
uncharacterised group of grass pollen isoallergens, which have been
designated Poa pIX [1]. 

The N-terminal region of Poa pIX has been shown to possess epitopes that
cross-react with the acidic group V allergens of Timothy grass [2].
Comparison of amino acid sequences of recombinant Poa p IX proteins with
those of Lol pI isoallergens revealed no significant sequence similarities. 
By contrast, a low level of similarity is observed between the N-terminal
sequences of these proteins and the Phl pV proteins [2]. A C-terminal
fragment, conserved in Poa pIX proteins, appears to contain epitopes
unique to these proteins [2].

POAALLERGEN is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
the Poa pIX/Phl pVI family of pollen allergens. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from short conserved regions spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment.
Two iterations on OWL29.6 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 13 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found, all of which appear to be fragments that fail to match
one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 9 sequences, and 8
partial matches.
