RASTRNSFRMNG
Ras proteins bind GDP/GTP and possess intrinsic GTPase activity. The 
mammalian ras gene family consists of the Harvey and Kirsten ras genes
(c-H-ras1 and c-K-ras2), an inactive pseudogene of each (c-H-ras2 and
c-K-ras1) and the n-ras gene. Mutations in the gene products are
implicated in a variety of human tumours [1,2].

The crystal structure of the normal human c-H-ras oncogene protein lacking
a flexible C-terminal tail reveals that the protein consists of a 6-
stranded beta-sheet, 4 alpha-helices, and 9 connecting loops [3]. Four
loops are involved in interactions with bound guanosine diphosphate: one
with the phosphates, another with the ribose, and 2 with the guanine base.
Most transforming proteins (in vivo and in vitro) have single amino acid
substitutions at one of a few key positions in 3 of these 4 loops, plus one
additional loop. The biological functions of the remaining loops and other
exposed regions are currently unknown. However, one loop is the binding site
for a neutralising monoclonal antibody and another for a putative effector
region; mutations in the latter region do not alter guanine nucleotide
binding or guanosine triphosphatase activity, but they do reduce the
transforming activity of activated proteins [3].

RASTRNSFRMNG is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for ras
and ras-related transforming proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 15 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 encodes
the nucleotide-binding region; motifs 2, 3 and 4 span strands 3, 4 and
5; and motif 5 encompasses the C-terminal helix. Four iterations on
OWL26.3 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 308 sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches were
also found, all of which are fragments and ras-related proteins that fail
to make significant matches with one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 490 sequences, and 73
partial matches.
