LACTOPTASE
Proteolytic enzymes that use serine in their catalytic machinery are 
widespread and numerous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes
[1]. They encompass a range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase,
endopeptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase. More than 20 serine
protease families (denoted S1 - S27) have been identified, which have been
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
and functional similarities [1]. Structures from four clans have been
examined (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be unrelated, suggesting at 
least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidase, and possibly many more
[1]. Since that examination structural representaions from the other two 
clan members (SF, SG) have been determined [3].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

Lactococcus X-Pro dipeptidyl-peptidase proteins belong to the S15 family of 
the carboxypeptidase (SC) clan [1,3]. These proteins, which have similar 
specificity to mammalian dipeptidyl-peptidase IV, cleave Xaa-Pro-|-X bonds, 
releasing N-terminal dipeptides. The penultimate residue must be proline. 
In Lactococcus, the proteins exist as cytoplasmic homodimers [1]. 

LACTOPTASE is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Lactococcus X-Pro dipeptidyl-peptidase (S15) family of serine proteases. The
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the 
motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually the full 
alignment length. The active site serine lies in the region between motifs
4 and 5. Note that previously-reported positions for the active Asp and His
residues are not conserved in this alignment - however, other positions are
conserved and might be better candidates for these two active site residues. 
Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising five sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
