LSHMANOLYSIN
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship [1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1].

Leishmanolysin is an enzyme found in Leishmania and related parasitic
protozoa [1]. The endopeptidase is the most abundant protein on the cell
surface during the promastigote stage of the parasite, and is attached to
the membrane by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor [1]. In the amastigote
form, the parasite lives in lysosomes of host macrophages, producing a
form of the protease that has an acidic pH optimum [1]. This differs from
most other metalloproteases and may be an adaptation to the environment in
which the organism survives [1]. The protein contains a catalytic HEXXH
motif, in which the additional zinc-binding residue is unknown.

LSHMANOLYSIN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a fingerprint for
the leishmanolysin (M8) metalloproteases. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the central portion of the alignment - motif 3 includes the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142), which contains 
the catalytic HEXXH motif; and motif 4 contains a conserved glutamate, which
may provide the additional zinc ligand. Two iterations on OWL29.3 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 16
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 21 sequences.
