VP7CAPSID
Bluetongue virus (BTV) is a representative of the orbivirus genus of the 
Reoviridae [1]. Orbiviruses infect mammalian hosts through insect vectors,
causing economically-important diseases of domesticated animals [1]. They
possess a segmented, double-stranded RNA genome within a capsid that
comprises four major polypeptides, designated VP2, VP3, VP5 and VP7. On 
entering a target cell, an outer layer, formed from VP2 and VP5, is removed,
leaving an intact core within the cell [1]. The core, which is 70nm across, 
contains 780 copies of VP7, which together form 260 trimeric 'bristly'
capsomeres clothing an inner scaffold constructed from VP3 [1].

The 3D structure of VP7 reveals two domains, one a beta-sandwich, the other
a bundle of alpha-helices, and a short C-terminal arm, which is thought to
unite trimers during capsid formation [1]. A concentration of methionine 
residues at the core of the molecule could provide plasticity, relieving 
structural mismatches during assembly [1]. 

The 3D structure of baculovirus-expressed core protein VP7 of African horse
sickness virus serotype 4 (AHSV-4) has been determined to 2.3A resolution 
[2]. During crystallisation, the two-domain protein is cleaved, leaving 
only the top domain, in a manner reminiscent of bluetongue virus (BTV) VP7; 
this suggests that connections between top and bottom domains are relatively
weak for these two distinct orbiviruses [2]. The top domains of both BTV and
AHSV VP7 are trimeric and structurally very similar. Electron density maps 
indicate an extra density feature along their molecular 3-fold axes, 
probably the result of an unidentified ion [2]. The characteristics of the
molecular surface indicate the possibility of attachment to the cell via 
attachment of an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif in the top domain of VP7 to a 
cellular integrin for both of these orbiviruses [2]. 

VP7CAPSID is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for viral
VP7 core proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 encodes most of helix 2;
motif 2 encodes most of helix 3; motif 3 includes helix 4; motif 4 spans
helix 5 and strand 1; motif 5 includes strand 6; motif 6 spans strands 8-10;
motif 7 includes part of strand 12; motif 8 spans helix 8; and motif 9
includes most of helix 9. Two iterations on OWL30.1 were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 13 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was found, VP7_BRD, a VP7 protein from
broadhaven virus that matches motifs 3 and 8.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 13 sequences.
