HISTAMINEH1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Histamine is distributed within mast cells in all peripheral tissues and
is a well-characterised mediator of inflammation and allergy [6]. It also
regulates release of gastric acid from parietal cells in the gastric
mucosa. H1 receptors mediate increase in vascular permeability induced
by histamine at sites of inflammation. H1 antagonists are used clinically
in the treatment of allergic and anaphylactic reactions, various
inflammatory conditions, and motion sickness. The receptor is distributed
widely in the periphery, notably smooth muscle, where it stimulates
contraction, and also in the adrenal medulla, vascular endothelium and
heart. It is found throughout the CNS, including the cerebral cortex, 
spinal cord and cerebellum.

HISTAMINEH1R is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
histamine H1 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the
alignment that characterise the H1 receptors but distinguish them from the
H2 receptors - motif 1 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 4 and part of the
second external loop; motif 2 spans part of the second external loop and
the N-terminus of TM domain 5; motifs 3-7 lie in the third cytoplasmic loop
motif 8 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 6 and part of the third external
loop; and motif 9 lies in the C-terminal region following TM domain 7. A
single iteration on OWL27.1 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
