ANNEXINI
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster,
Xenopus laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and
Neurospora crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from
those found in other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino-acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium-binding sites are found in
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity, exo-
cytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the extra-
cellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA replication
[2]. Type I annexins inhibit phospholipase A2, either in response to
inflammation, or following dephosphorylation by protein kinases involved
in the signal transduction pathway. The protein may also associate with
the cell cytoskeleton by binding to actin fibres.

ANNEXINI is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type I
annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those areas that characterise type
I annexins but distinguish them from related annexin subtypes - motifs 1 
and 2 lie at the N-terminus; motif 3 resides in the first annexin repeat;
motif 4 is located between the second and third annexin repeats; and motif
5 lies in the C-terminal portion of the third annexin repeat. Two iterations
on SPTR41_24f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 9 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found,
both of which are type I annexin isoforms from the domestic pigeon. 
