FNTYPEIII
Fibronectins are multi-domain glycoproteins found in a soluble form in
plasma, and in an insoluble form in loose connective tissue and basement
membranes [1]. They contain multiple copies of 3 repeat regions (types 
I, II and III), which bind to a variety of substances including heparin,
collagen, DNA, actin, fibrin and fibronectin receptors on cell surfaces.
The wide variety of these substances means that fibronectins are involved 
in a number of important functions: e.g., wound healing; cell adhesion; 
blood coagulation; cell differentiation and migration; maintenance of the
cellular cytoskeleton; and tumour metastasis [2]. The role of fibronectin 
in cell differentiation is demonstrated by the marked reduction in the 
expression of its gene when neoplastic transformation occurs. Cell 
attachment has been found to be mediated by the binding of the tetrapeptide
RGDS to integrins on the cell surface [3], although related sequences can 
also display cell adhesion activity.

Plasma fibronectin occurs as a dimer of 2 different subunits, linked 
together by 2 disulphide bonds near the C-terminus. The difference in the 
2 chains occurs in the type III repeat region and is caused by alternative 
splicing of the mRNA from one gene [1]. The observation that, in a given
protein, an individual repeat of one of the 3 types (e.g., the first FnIII
repeat) shows much less similarity to its subsequent tandem repeats within
that protein than to its equivalent repeat between fibronectins from other
species, has suggested that the repeating structure of fibronectin arose at
an early stage of evolution. It also seems to suggest that the structure is
subject to high selective pressure [4].

The fibronectin type III repeat region is an approximately 100 amino acid
domain, different tandem repeats of which contain binding sites for DNA,
heparin and the cell surface [1]. The superfamily of sequences believed to 
contain FnIII repeats represents 45 different families, the majority of 
which are involved in cell surface binding in some manner, or are receptor 
protein tyrosine kinases, or cytokine receptors. 

FNTYPEIII is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type
III fibronectin repeats. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs span the full domain length. Four
iterations on OWL18.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 95 sequences was identified, including all known
sequences with FnIII repeats and a number of bacterial sugar digesting
enzymes and uptake hydrogenases. Numerous partial matches were also found.
Closer inspection of the result shows there is poor definition between the
true set, partial matches and noise, indicating that this is not a powerful
fingerprint: this arises largely because of the poor sequence similarity
between the type III repeats.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 173 sequences, and 266
partial matches.
