ANGIOTENSINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Angiotensin II is the principal mediator of the renin-angiotensin system;
it circulates in the bloodstream, stimulating vasoconstriction and
retention of salt and water [6]. It also stimulates increased fluid intake
and regulates the neuroendocrine system. Many of its actions are mediated
by release of hormones from endocrine glands, e.g. vasopressin, catechol-
amines, aldosterone, growth-hormone, etc.. Molecular cloning studies have
identifed 2 major receptor subtypes, designated AT1 and AT2. 

ANGIOTENSINR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
angiotensin II receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 15 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
largely within loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the angiotensin receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus of
TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 2, leading into the
first external loop; motif 3 lies within TM domain 3; motif 4 spans the
C-terminal portion of TM domain 4, leading into the second external loop;
motifs 5 and 6 lie at the N- and C-termini of TM domain 5; motif 7 lies in
the third external loop; and motif 8 spans part of the third external loop,
leading into the N-terminus of TM domain 7. Two iterations on OWL29.0 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 21
sequences was identfied. Several partial matches were also found, including
several angiotensin II receptor fragments and 2 platelet activating factor
receptors.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences, and 5
partial matches.
