PNDRDTASEI
The pyridine nucleotide-disulphide reductases (PNDR) use the isoalloxazine
ring of FAD to shuttle reducing equivalents from NAD(P)H to a Cys residue
that is usually a part of a redox-active disulphide bridge. In a second
step, the reduced disulphide reduces the substrate. On the basis of 
sequence and structural similarities [1], PNDR can be categorised into 2
groups. Class I includes glutathione reductase, trypanothione reductase,
lipoamide dehydrogenase and mercuric reductase. They cover a wide range of
catalytic functions: glutathione reductase ensures that the cell has 
enough reduced glutathione to maintain protein thiol groups in the reduced
state [2]; trypanothione reductase carries out the analogous reaction in 
trypanosomal cells (trypanothione is an analogue of glutathione) [3]; 
lipoamide dehydrogenase, the E3 component of alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase
multienzyme complex, oxidises the dihydrolypoyl groups of lipoate 
acyltransferase, and so couples glycolysis to the tricarboxylic acid cycle 
[4]; and mercuric reductase enables bacteria to detoxify the mercuric ion
by reducing it to elemental mercury, which evaporates from the cell [5].

To date, the 3D-structures of glutathione reductase [6], mercuric reductase
[7], lipoamide dehydrogenase [8] and trypanothione reductase [9] have been
solved. The proteins exist as homodimers, having 4 domains per monomer: an
N-terminal FAD-binding domain; an NAD(P)H-binding domain; a central domain;
and a C-terminal interface domain. The FAD- and NAD(P)H-binding domains
have similar doubly-wound alpha/beta folds, suggesting that these domains
evolved by gene duplication [10]. The relative orientations of structural
domains in PNDR may vary significantly. Since the active site occurs between
domains, this alteration provides a mechanism for adjusting the catalytic 
properties to meet the special requirements of a particular  reaction.

PNDRDTASEI is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
PNDR class I family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 11 sequences: motifs 1 and 4 contain 3 conserved Gly residues and
correspond to the ADP moiety binding site for FAD and NAD(P) respectively
(cf. motifs 1 and 3 of signature FADPNR); motif 6 encodes the binding site 
for the FAD flavin moiety (cf. motif 5 of FADPNR); motif 2 contains 2 Cys
residues involved in the redox-active disulphide bond, and includes the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern PYRIDINE_REDOX_1 (PS00076); and motif 9
contains a conserved His-Glu diad at positions 16 and 21 (mercuric
reductases have a conserved Tyr instead of His). Site-directed mutagenesis
experiments on lipoamide dehydrogenase show that mutation of the His-Glu
diad impairs intramolecular electron transfer between the disulphide/dithiol
and the FADH-/FAD [11]. Four iterations on OWL26.3 were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 62 sequences was 
identified. Numerous partial matches were also found, all of which are
members of the PNDR and FADPNR families (matching 6-8 motifs, and 5 or
less motifs respectively). 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 102 sequences, and 184
partial matches.
