FRAGILYSIN
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, around
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
relatively common, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure 
adopted by this motif in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of their metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. In the first group, a glutamic acid completes the active site -
these are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this group show some sequence
relationship and have been assigned to clan MA [1]. The second group, which
have a third histidine as the extra metal-binding residue, are termed
HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB on the basis of their inter-relation-
ship[1]. In the third group, the additional metal-binding residues are
unidentified. The fourth group is diverse - the metal-binding residues are
known but do not form the HEXXH motif. And the fifth group comprises the
remaining families where the metal-binding residues are as yet unknown [1,2].

Fragilysin is a zinc-containing enterotoxin that belongs to the M10C
metallopeptidase family, which form part of the MB clan [3]. It is produced
by around 10% of pathogenic strains of the bacterium Bacteroides fragilis
(which is found in mammalian large intestines in approximately the same
quantities as Esherichia coli), and has been shown to cause diarrhoea.
The fragilysin enterotoxin acts by proteolytically damaging the intestinal
epithelium (at the tight junctions and basement membranes), causing the
release of fluids into the intestinal lumen. In view of the intrinsic 
resistance of the intestinal tract to protease activity (it being constantly
bathed in digestive proteases), an enzyme activity capable of puncturing
the epithelium is considered rather unusual. However the exact mechanism of
action of the protein is unknown [4].

FRAGILYSIN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
fragilysin. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motifs 6 and 7 span the region encoded by
PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142), which describes the HEXXH active
site; and motif 7 contains three potentially completely conserved residues 
that could be candidates for the additional active site histidine or 
glutamic acid. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified. A single 
partial match was also found, S75941B, a fragilysin C-terminal fragment.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
