REACTNCENTRE
Purple bacteria have a diverse metabolism, which enables them to grow
photosynthetically under anaerobic conditions by virtue of using a
photosynthetic reaction centre (PRC) [1]. Most reaction centres from these
bacteria comprise 3 elements (the light (L), medium (M) and heavy (H)
chains), although some contain a tightly-bound cytochrome molecule [2].
Several other factors, such as carotenoid, bacteriochlorophyll pigments,
quinones and other light-harvesting co-factors are also required [1], all
of which are associated with the L and M chains [3]. The complete complex
is intimately involved in the transformation of light energy into chemical
energy [3], with an adjacent oxidoreductase complex using the reduced
quinones to produce a membrane potential [1]. Many of these processes are
similar to corresponding processes in the thylakoid membranes of higher
plant chloroplasts, which contain photosystem II, a complex similar to the
bacterial PRC [1].

The L and M chains are similar polypeptides, which span the membrane and
are required for pigment binding [2,3]. They have been shown to be photo-
chemically active in the absence of the H chain [2]. The PRC is one of the
few transmembrane (TM) complexes for which there is a known structure: it 
has been shown that both the L and M chains have 5 TM helices of between
24-30 amino acids, which are tilted up to 38 degrees to the membrane [2].
A difference in the number and type of charged residues on either side of
the membrane sets up an electrical dipole, which may affect the direction
and speed of the light-driven electron transport effected by the PRC [2].
Although the sequences of the TM regions are not well conserved, L and M
chains contain small clusters of conserved amino acids that correspond to
binding sites for bacteriochlorophyll, iron and quinone [3].

REACTNCENTRE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial PRC L and M chains. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: motifs 1-5 encode each of the 5 TM helices -
motif 4 includes most of the region encoded by PROSITE pattern REACTION_
CENTER (PS00244), of which the first and second conserved histidines are
magnesium atom and iron atom ligands respectively. Two iterations on OWL22.0
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 14
sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches were also found:
RCEM_CHLAU is a bacterial M chain that fails to make a significant match
with the first motif; the remaining matches constitute a subfamily
of related plant chloroplast photosystem II proteins, all of which match
motifs 2 and 4.   

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 21 sequences, and 11
partial matches.
