C5ANPHYLTXNR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The accumulation of phagocytic cells at the site of injury or infection is
regulated by substances that stimulate chemotaxis, granule secretion,
superoxide generation and upregulation of cell surface adhesion molecules
in cells of the immune system [6]. The chemoattractant substances include
C5a, N-formylmethionyl-containing peptides, interleukin 8, leukotriene B4
and platelet activating factor, many of which participate in anaphylactoid
and septic shock [6]. The C5a receptor is found on cells of the immune
system (e.g., neutrophils, macrophages, mast cells and related cell lines),
and is also present in smooth muscle. The amino acid sequence of the
receptor contains several N-terminal acidic residues, which may be
involved in binding the basic C5a peptide.

C5ANPHYLTXNR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
C5a-anaphylatoxin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the C5a receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus of TM
domain 1; motif 2 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 lies at the
C-terminus of TM domain 2; motif 4 lies at the N-terminus of TM domain 3;
motif 5 spans the second cytoplasmic loop and the N-terminus of TM domain 4;
motif 6 spans the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs 7 and 8 lie at the
C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL26.3 was required to reach convergence,
no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
