FNTYPEI
Fibronectins are multi-domain glycoproteins, found in a soluble form in
plasma, and in an insoluble form in loose connective tissue and basement
membranes [1]. They contain multiple copies of 3 repeat regions (types 
I, II and III), which bind to a variety of substances including heparin,
collagen, DNA, actin, fibrin and fibronectin receptors on cell surfaces.
The wide variety of these substances means that fibronectins are involved 
in a number of important functions: e.g., wound healing; cell adhesion; 
blood coagulation; cell differentiation and migration; maintenance of the
cellular cytoskeleton; and tumour metastasis [2]. The role of fibronectin 
in cell differentiation is demonstrated by the marked reduction in the 
expression of its gene when neoplastic transformation occurs. Cell 
attachment has been found to be mediated by the binding of the tetrapeptide
RGDS to integrins on the cell surface [3], although related sequences can 
also display cell adhesion activity.

Plasma fibronectin occurs as a dimer of 2 different subunits, linked 
together by 2 disulphide bonds near the C-terminus. The difference in the 
2 chains occurs in the type III repeat region and is caused by alternative 
splicing of the mRNA from one gene [1]. The observation that, in a given 
protein, an individual repeat of one of the 3 types (e.g., the first FnI 
repeat) shows much less similarity to its subsequent tandem repeats within 
that protein than to its equivalent repeat between fibronectins from other 
species, has suggested that the repeating structure of fibronectin arose at
an early stage of evolution. It also seems to suggest that the structure is
subject to high selective pressure [4].

Although the function of the FnI repeat is uncertain, it is believed that 
it may contain the fibrin binding region. This hypothesis arises from the 
observation that tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) that has had its 
type I repeat proteolytically cleaved, loses its ability to bind fibrin. 
Similarly, urokinase, which resembles t-PA, does not bind fibrin, nor does
it contain an FnI repeat. However, a t-PA molecule has been cloned that has
a high affinity for fibrin but does not contain an FnI repeat region [1].

FNTYPEI is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type I
fibronectin repeats. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 6 sequences: the motifs span the full length of the FnI domain. Two
iterations on OWL19.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 13 sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
