VASOPRSNV1AR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Vasopressin and oxytocin are members of the neurohypophyseal hormone family
found in all mammalian species [6]. They are present in high levels in the
posterior pituitary. Vasopressin has an essential role in the control of 
the water content of the body, acting in the kidney to increase water and
sodium absorption [6]. In higher concentrations, vasopressin stimulates
contraction of vascular smooth muscle, stimulates glycogen breakdown in the
liver, induces platelet activation, and evokes release of corticotrophin 
from the anterior pituitary [6]. Vasopressin and its analogues are used
clinically to treat diabetes insipidus [6].

In the periphery, the V1A receptor is found in high levels in vascular
smooth muscle, myometrium and the bladder where it mediates contraction [6]. 
In the CNS, V1 sites are distributed widely and are found in lateral septal
nucleus, hippocampus, superior collicular, substantia nigra and central
grey matter [6]. The receptors activate phosphoinositide metabolism through
a pertussis-toxin-insensitive G protein, probably of the Gq/G11 class [6].

VASOPRSNV1AR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
vasopressin V1A receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections 
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the vasopressin V1A receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1
and 2 lie at the N-terminus; motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic loop and
the N-terminus of TM domain 2; motif 4 spans the second cytoplasmic loop
and the N-terminus of TM domain 4; motif 5 lies in the third cytoplasmic
loop; and motifs 6 and 7 lie at the C-terminus. A single iteration on
OWL29.4 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set. Three partial matches were also found:
I50132 is a vasotocin receptor that matches motifs 3, 4 and 6; V1BR_HUMAN
and V1BR_RAT are vasopressin V1B receptors that match motifs 3 and 4. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
