HGRDTASE
Proteins that transport heavy metals in micro-organisms and mammals share
similarities in their sequences and structures. These proteins provide an
important focus for research, some being involved in bacterial resistance
to toxic metals, such as lead and cadmium, while others are involved in
inherited human syndromes, such as Wilson and Menkes diseases [1].

A conserved 30-residue domain has been found in a number of these heavy
metal transport or detoxification proteins [1]. The domain, which has been
termed Heavy-Metal-Associated (HMA), contains two conserved cysteines that
are probably involved in metal binding. 

The HMA domain has been identified in the N-terminal regions of a variety
of cation transporting ATPases, and in other ATPases such as fixI from 
Rhizobium meliloti; pacS from Synechococcus strain PCC 7942; Mycobacterium 
leprae ctpA and ctpB; and Escherichia coli hypothetical protein yhhO. In
addition, the domain has been found in bacterial mercuric reductase; the
copP copper-binding protein of Helicobacter pylori; and in the N-terminal 
regions of mercuric transport protein periplasmic component (gene merP) and
plasmids carried by mercury-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, where it seems
to be a mercury scavenger that specifically binds to one Hg(2+) ion, passing
this to mercuric reductase via the merT protein. 

The structure of the mercuric ion-binding protein MerP from Shigella
flexneri has been determined. The fold has been classed as a ferredoxin-like
alpha-beta sandwich, having a beta-alpha beta-beta alpha-beta architecture,
with the two alpha-helices overlaying a four-stranded anti-parallel beta-
sheet [2]. Structural differences between the reduced and mercury-bound 
forms of merP are localised to the metal-binding loop containing the 
consensus sequence GMTCXXC, the two cysteines of which are involved in
bi-coordination of Hg(2+) [2].

Mercuric reductase, which contains a single copy of the HMA domain, is
involved in a specialised system that confers resistance to Hg(2+) on 
bacteria. The merA protein is responsible for volatilising mercury, 
catalysing the reaction:

 Hg + NADP(+) + H(+) = Hg(2+) + NADPH

The protein functions as a homodimer, with an FAD flavoprotein; its active
site is a redox-active disulphide bond. 

HGRDTASE is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for class II
mercuric reductases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
the N-terminal half of the alignment - motif 1, which lies in the HMA 
domain, encodes the first alpha-helix, and includes the second metal-
binding cysteine; and motif 2 lies in the putative FAD binding domain. 
Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 19 sequences was identified. Several partial 
matches were also found, all of which are mercuric reductases or related 
enzymes that fail to match one or more motifs. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 19 sequences, and 11
partial matches.
