PHGLYCKINASE
Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) catalyses the second step of glycolysis, the 
reversible conversion of 1,3-diphospho-D-glycerate and ADP to 3-phospho-D-
glycerate and ATP [1-3]. This is an important reaction in the generation 
of ATP required for the glycolytic pathways of aerobes and anaerobes, and 
for carbon fixation in plants [1]. 

The enzyme exists as a monomer split into 2 almost equally-sized domains, 
which essentially correspond to the N- and C-halves of the protein (except
for the last 15 residues, which loop back into the N-terminal domain [1,2]).
This extended 2-domain structure is probably associated with large-scale 
'hinge-bending' conformational changes, similar to those found in
hexokinase [1,2].

At the core of each domain is a 6-stranded parallel beta-sheet surrounded by
alpha-helices [1,2]. The structures of the domains are highly similar, with
only a slight change in the order of the strands, yet they share no sequence
similarity [1,2]. As with other glycolytic enzymes, the secondary structure
elements tend to adopt repeating beta-alpha units, PGK containing 12 such
units, 6 in each domain [1,2]. 

Mutations in the PGK gene may result in chronic diseases (such as hemolytic
anaemia), which can be accompanied by either mental retardation or muscular
disease (rhabdomyolysis) [3].

PHGLYCKINASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
phosphoglycerate kinase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 14 sequences: motifs 1-4 lie in the N-terminal domain; part
of motif 5 corresponds to the interdomain hinge; and motifs 6-9 lie in the 
C-terminal domain, motif 7 spanning conserved residues in the substrate-
binding cleft encoded by PROSITE pattern PGLYCERATE_KINASE (PS0111). Two
iterations on OWL27.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a 
true set comprising 70 sequences was identified. Seven partial matches were
also found, all of which are PGK fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 91 sequences.
