SUBTILISIN
Proteolytic enzymes that exploit serine in their catalytic activity are
ubiquitous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes [1]. They 
include a wide range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase, endo-
peptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase activity. Over 20 families
(denoted S1 - S27) of serine protease have been identified, these being
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
similarity and other functional evidence [1]. Structures are known for four
of the clans (SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be totally unrelated,
suggesting at least four evolutionary origins of serine peptidases and
possibly many more [1].

Notwithstanding their different evolutionary origins, there are similarities
in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin
and carboxypeptidase C clans have a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate and 
histidine in common: serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile, and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangements of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example the catalytic triad in 
the chymotrypsin clan (SA) is ordered HDS, but is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB) and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

The subtilisin family (S8) is the second largest serine protease family
characterised to date. It is widespread, being found in eubacteria,
archaebacteria, eukaryotes and viruses [1-3]. The vast majority of the
family are endopeptidases, although there is an exopeptidase, tri-
peptidyl peptidase [1,2]. Structures have been determined for several 
members of the subtilisin family: they exploit the same catalytic triad as
the chymotrypsins, although the residues occur in a different order (HDS in
chymotrypsin and DHS in subtilisin), but the structures show no other
similarity [1,2]. Some subtilisins are mosaic proteins, and others 
contain N- and C-terminal extensions that show no sequence similarity to 
any other known protein [1].

The proprotein-processing endopeptidases kexin, furin and related enzymes
form a distinct subfamily known as the kexin subfamily. These preferentially
cleave C-terminally to paired basic amino acids. Members of this subfamily
can be identified by subtly different motifs around the active site [1,2].
Members of the kexin family, along with endopeptidases R, T and K from the
yeast Tritirachium and cuticle-degrading peptidase from Metarhizium, require
thiol activation. This can be attributed to the presence of Cys-173 near to
the active histidine [2].

Only 1 viral member of the subtilisin family is known, a 56kDa protease
from herpes virus 1, which infects the channel catfish [1]. The virus  
possesses a unique open reading frame insert, within which the protease
is found [1]; this has almost certainly been 'captured' from another host. 

SUBTILISIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
subtilisin-like family of serine proteases. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions surrounding the active site - motif 1 includes the
region encoded by PROSITE pattern SUBTILASE_ASP (PS00136), which contains
the active Asp; motif 2 spans the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
SUBTILASE_HIS (PS00137), which contains the active His; and motif 3
includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern SUBTILASE_SER (PS00138),
which contains the active Ser. Two iterations on OWL28.2 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 201 sequences was
identified. Three partial matches were also found: NRL_2SBT2 is a fragment
that lacks the first motif; ASPA_AERSA is a subtilase-like protease from
Aeromonas salmonicida that fails to make a significant match with motif 2,
although the catalytic histidine is present; and PRCA_ANAVA is calcium-
dependent protease from Anabaena variabilis that matches poorly with motif 3
and lacks the catalytic serine.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 235 sequences, and 5
partial matches.
