THROMBINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Thrombin is a serine protease with a central role in blood clotting [6].
It cleaves various substrates involved in coagulation, and activates cell
surface receptors via a novel proteolytic action. Thrombin stimulates
aggregation and secretion in blood platelets at the site of vascular injury,
and also has inflammatory and reparative actions, stimulating chemotaxis in
monocytes, proliferation of fibroblasts and lymphocytes, and inducing
endothelium-dependent relaxation of blood vessels [6]. The protein activates
a number of substrates involved in coagulation: it cleaves fibrinogen to
fibrin and activates coagulation factor XIII; it also activates factors V
and VIII [6]. When bound to thrombomodulin, it activates plasma protein C, 
which, in concert with protein S, inactivates factors Va and VIIIa, leading
to a decrease in thrombin formation [6].

The thrombin receptor is expressed in high levels in platelets, vascular
endothelial cells, and various cell lines [6]. The receptor activates 
phosphoinositide metabolism via a pertussis-toxin-insensitive G protein,
and inhibits adenylyl cyclase via a pertussis-toxin-sensitive G protein [6].

THROMBINR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
thrombin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections spanning
the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that characterise
the thrombin receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the
rhodopsin-like GPCRs - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the N-terminus; motif 3 spans
the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motif
5 lies in the second external loop, leading into TM domain 6; motif 6 spans 
the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs 7 and 8 lie at the C-terminus. A 
single iteration on OWL30.2 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
