OXYTOCINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Vasopressin and oxytocin are members of the neurohypophyseal hormone family
found in all mammalian species [6]. They are present in high levels in the
posterior pituitary. Oxytocin stimulates contraction of uterine smooth 
muscle, and stimulates milk secretion in response to suckling by inducing
contraction of myoepithelial cells in the mammary gland [6]. Clinically, it
is used to induce labour and promote lactation.

Oxytocin receptors are found in uterine smooth muscle, myoepithelial
cells in the mammary gland, and in the pituitary [6]. Activation of
phosphoinositide metabolism is effected via a pertussis-toxin-insensitive
G protein, probably of the Gq/G11 class [6].

OXYTOCINR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
oxytocin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment 
that characterise the oxytocin receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the
N-terminus; motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans the
second cytoplasmic loop; motif 5 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; motifs
6 and 7 lie at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL29.1 was required
to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the
starting set. Several partial matches were found, all of which are either
fragments (HSOXYTOC and CJOXYR) or closely related mesotocin (BMMREC)
and isotocin receptors (I50130) that fail to make significant matches with
one or more motifs. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 7 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
