MUSCRINICM4R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, present in the central nervous
system, spinal cord motoneurons and autonomic preganglia, modulate a
variety of physiological functions, including airway, eye and intestinal
smooth muscle contractions; heart rate; and glandular secretions. The
receptors mediate adenylate cyclase attenuation, calcium and potassium
channel activation, and phosphatidyl inositol turnover [6]. This diversity
may result from the occurrence of multiple receptor subtypes (of which 5
are currently known, designated M1 to M5), which have been classified
based on observed differences in ligand binding to receptors in membranes
from several tissues.

The M4 receptor is found in high levels in neuronal cells of the CNS [7];
its distribution largely overlaps with that of M1 and M3 subtypes. It is
also found in cell lines. No selective agonist has been described [7].

MUSCRINICM4R is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
muscarinic M4 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within the third cytoplasmic loop. Two iterations on OWL28.0 were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was
identified. Two partial matches were also found (S74916 and ACM4_BOVIN), 
both of which are M4 receptor fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
