GPROTEINAI
Guanine nucleotide binding proteins (G proteins) are a family of membrane-
associated proteins that couple extracellularly-activated integral-membrane
receptors to intracellular effectors, such as ion channels and enzymes that
vary the concentration of second messenger molecules [1-3]. G proteins are
composed of 3 subunits (alpha, beta and gamma) which, in the resting state,
associate as a trimer at the inner face of the plasma membrane. The alpha
subunit has a molecule of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) bound to it:
stimulation of the G protein by an activated receptor leads to its exchange
for GTP (guanosine triphosphate). This results in the separation of the
alpha from the beta and gamma subunits, which always remain tightly
associated as a dimer. Both the alpha and beta-gamma subunits are then able
to interact with effectors, either individually or in a cooperative manner.
The intrinsic GTPase activity of the alpha subunit hydrolyses the bound GTP
to GDP. This returns the alpha subunit to its inactive conformation and
allows it to reassociate with the beta-gamma subunit, thus restoring the
system to its resting state.

G protein alpha subunits are 350-400 amino acids in length and have
molecular weights in the range 40-45 kDa. Seventeen distinct types of alpha
subunit have been identified in mammals. These fall into 4 main  groups on
the basis of both sequence similarity and function: alpha-S, alpha-Q,
alpha-I and alpha-12 [3]. Many alpha subunits are substrates for
ADP-ribosylation by cholera or pertussis toxins. They are often N-terminally
acylated, usually with myristate and/or palmitoylate, and these fatty acid
modifications are probably important for membrane association and high-
affinity interactions with other proteins. The atomic structure of the alpha
subunit of the G protein involved in mammalian vision, transducin, has been
elucidated in both GTP- and GDB-bound forms, and shows considerable
similarity in both primary and tertiary structure in the nucleotide-binding
regions to other G proteins, such as p21-ras and EF-Tu.

The G protein alpha-I (G alpha-I) class can be divided into alpha-I-like,
alpha-O-like, alpha-T-like and alpha-Z-like. The alpha-I-like proteins were
originally identified as the proteins responsible for receptor-mediated
inhibition of adenylyl cyclase, hence 'I' for inhibitory. Alpha-O is an
extremely abundant G protein that is expressed predominantly in the brain,
where it is known to couple receptors such as the M2 acetylcholine receptor
to neuronal potassium and calcium channels, and has been implicated in
membrane trafficking.

Alpha-T, transducin, is the G protein responsible for transducing the light
response in vertebrate retinae. It is activated by rhodopsin or cone opsin,
and in turn activates the effector enzyme cyclic guanine monophosphate
phosphodiesterase (cGMP-PDE). The resultant lowering of GDP levels causes
cGMP-gated sodium channels to close, and the subsequent hyperpolarisation
of the cell membrane leads to the generation of a nervous impulse. Alpha-Z
is a relatively unknown protein showing significant divergence by comparison
with conserved regions of other alpha subunits.

GPROTEINAI is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
G protein alpha subunit group I. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise group I alpha subunits but distinguish them from other
G protein alpha subtypes. Three iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 57 sequences was
identified. Three partial matches were also found: Q21917 and O44409 are
C.elegans proteins that share significant similarity with the alpha-I 
proteins; GBA2_DICDI is an alpha subunit from the slime mold D.discoideum.
