PRTPISMRASEI
Prokaryotic topoisomerase I, otherwise known as relaxing enzyme, untwisting 
enzyme or swivelase, catalyses the ATP-independent breakage of single-
stranded DNA, followed by passage and rejoining of another single-stranded 
DNA region [1]. This reaction brings about the conversion of one topological
isomer of DNA into another: e.g., relaxation of superhelical turns; 
interconversion of simple and knotted rings of single-stranded DNA; and
intertwisting of single-stranded rings of complementary sequences [1,2].

Prokaryotic topoisomerase I folds in an unusual way to give 4 distinct
domains, enclosing a hole large enough to accommodate a double-stranded DNA
segment [1]. A tyrosine at the active site, which lies at the interface of
2 domains, is involved in transient breakage of a DNA strand, and formation
of a covalent protein-DNA intermediate [1]. The structure reveals a
plausible mechanism by which this and related enzymes could catalyse the 
passage of one DNA strand through a transient break in another strand [1].

E.coli contains 2 type I topoisomerases: topoisomerases I and III [2].
Topoisomerase III can be purified as a potent concatenase, but its role in
DNA metabolism is still unclear [2]. Yeast, a eukaryote, also contains a
topoisomerase, which is similar in sequence and function to the prokaryotic
type I topoisomerases [3].

PRTPISMRASEI is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type
I prokaryotic DNA topoisomerases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment - motif 3 includes
part of the region encoded by PROSITE pattern TOPOISOMERASE_I_PROK
(PS00396), the tyrosine of which covalently binds the cleaved DNA strand.
Two iterations on OWL26.3 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 14 sequences was identified. One partial match
(PQ0259) was also found, a fragment lacking the portion of sequence bearing
the fifth motif.

An update on SPTR57.15_40.15f identified a true set of 3,205 sequences.
Numerous partial matches were also found, all of which are type I
prokaryotic DNA topoisomerases that fail to match one or more motifs.
