NITROPHORIN
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration, and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The 
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, tick
histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.
  
The nitrophorins [5,6] are a recently identified group of lipocalin outliers
that bind nitric oxide. They are present in the saliva of blood sucking 
insects, where they function as vasodilators and anticoagulent agents. 
  
NITROPHORIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
nitrophorins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2
sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes part of the GxW 
triplet, which resides in the first beta-strand (cf. LIPOCALIN signature
motif 1 and PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213)); motif 2 contains the haem 
attachment site; motif 3 encodes strand 4; motif 4 spans strands 7 and 8
(cf. LIPOCALIN signature motif 2); motif 5 encodes strand 9; and motif 6
spans helices 2 and 3. Two iterations on SPRT37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified.
