PHOSPHOCPHPR
The phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent sugar phosphotransferase system (PTS)
is a major carbohydrate transport system in bacteria. The PTS catalyses
the phosphorylation of sugar substrates during their translocation across
the cell membrane. The mechanism involves the transfer of a phosphoryl
group from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) via enzyme I (EI) to enzyme II (EII)
of the PTS system, which in turn transfers it to a phosphocarrier protein
(HPr) [1,2].

HPr is a small (79-90 amino acid) cytoplasmic protein - in certain 
bacteria, HPr is a domain in a larger protein that includes an EIII(Fru)
(IIA) domain, and in some cases also the EI domain. A conserved N-terminal
His serves as an acceptor for the phosphoryl group of EI, and a centrally
located conserved Ser (in Gram-positive bacteria only) is phosphorylated
by an ATP-dependent protein kinase, which process may play a role in
sugar transport. The phosphorylation sites are well conserved.

The structure of HPr comprises a 4-stranded anti-parallel beta-sheet, with
3 alpha-helices that pack against one face of the sheet, a fold known as an
open-face beta-sandwich [2]. The topology can be described as that of a
right-handed alpha-/beta-jelly-roll, by analogy with the beta-sandwich
jelly-roll fold of viral coat proteins, legume lectins, and so on. The
catalytic His and the regulatory Ser are located on the surface of the
protein, such that they can be phosphorylated without invoking
conformational changes.  

PHOSPHOCPHPR is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for HPr
phosphocarrier proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length, motifs 1 and 2 including the
His and Ser phosphorylation sites encoded by PROSITE patterns PTS_HPR_HIS
(PS00369) and PTS_HPR_SER (PS00589). Two iterations on OWL25.2 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 21
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 26 sequences.
