ENDOTHELINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Endothelins play an important role in the regulation of the cardiovascular
system [6]. They are the most potent vasoconstrictors identified, stimulate
cardiac constraction, regulate release of vasoactive substances, and 
stimulate mitogenesis in blood vessels in primary culture. They also
stimulate contraction in almost all other smooth muscles (e.g., uterus,
bronchus, vas deferens, stomach) and stimulate secretion in several tissues
(e.g., kidney, liver and adrenals). Endothelin receptors have also been
found in the brain, e.g. cerebral cortex, cerebellum and glial cells.
Endothelins have been implicated in a variety of pathophysiological
conditions associated with stress.

ENDOTHELINR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
endothelin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within either
loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the endothelin receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus leading
into TM domain 1; motifs 2-4 lie in the first and second cytoplasmic loops
and second external loop res.; motif 5 spans part of the second external
loop and TM domain 5; motif 6 spans part of TM domain 5 and the third
cytoplasmic loop; and motif 7 also lies in the third cytoplasmic loop.
Two iterations on OWL26.0 were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 10 sequences was identfied. A single partial
match was also found, an endothelin receptor fragment that matches only
motifs 3 and 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 14 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
