PHFRCTKINASE
The enzyme-catalysed transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP is an
important reaction in a wide variety of biological processes [1]. One
enzyme that utilises this reaction is phosphofructokinase (PFK), which
catalyses the phosphorylation of fructose-6-phosphate to fructose-1,6-
bisphosphate, a key regulatory step in the glycolytic pathway [1,2]. 

PFK exists as a homotetramer in bacteria and mammals (where each monomer
possesses 2 similar domains), and as an octomer in yeast (where there are
4 alpha- (PFK1) and 4 beta-chains (PFK2), the latter, like the mammalian
monomers, possessing 2 similar domains [1,2]). Structural studies of the
bacterial enzyme have shown the identical tetramer subunits to adopt 2 
different conformations: in a 'closed' state, the bound magnesium ion
bridges the phosphoryl groups of the enzyme products (ADP and fructose-1,6-
bisphosphate); and in an 'open' state, the magnesium ion binds only the ADP
[3], as the 2 products are now further apart. These conformations are
thought to be successive stages of a reaction pathway that requires subunit
closure to bring the 2 molecules sufficiently close to react [3].

Deficiency in PFK leads to glycogenosis type VII (Tauri's disease), an
autosomal recessive disorder characterised by severe nausea, vomiting,
muscle cramps and myoglobinuria in response to bursts of intense or
vigorous exercise [2]. Sufferers are usually able to lead a reasonably
ordinary life by learning to adjust activity levels [2].

PHFRCTKINASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
ATP-dependent phosphofructokinase family. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 4 contains an
aspartate residue important in phosphoryl transfer [1]; and motif 9 includes
the region encoded by PROSITE pattern PHOSPHOFRUCTOKINASE (PS00433), the
first and tenth residues of which have been shown to be important in
fructose-6-phosphate binding. Two iterations on OWL27.0 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 28 sequences was 
identified. Ten partial matches were also found: the sequences matching 
with 5 and 2 motifs are PFK fragments; those matching 3 motifs are members 
of the pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase family, which share some 
similarity with the PFK family.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 39 sequences, and 16
partial matches.
