DOPAMINED1BR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Dopamine neurons in the vertebrate central nervous system are involved in
the initiation and execution of movement, the maintenance of emotional
stability, and the regulation of pituitary function [6]. Various human
neurological diseases (e.g., Parkinson disease and schizophrenia), are
believed to be manifestations of dopamine and dopamine receptor imbalance.
The receptors have been divided into several different subtypes (designated
D1-D5), which may be distinguished by their G protein coupling, ligand
specificity, anatomical distribution and physiological effects.

D1 receptors are found in greatest abundance in the caudate-putamen,
nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercle, with lower levels in the frontal
cortex, habenula, amygdala, hypothalamus and thalamus [7]. In the periphery,
binding sites are found in the kidney, heart, liver and parathyroid gland
[7]. The receptors stimulate adenylyl cyclase through Gs; they may also be
able to stimulate phosphoinositide metabolism [7]. 

DOPAMINED1BR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
D1B family of dopamine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on
those areas of the alignment that characterise the D1B receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1
lies at the N-terminus leading into the N-terminal portion of TM domain 1;
motif 2 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 lies in the third
external loop; and motifs 4 and 5 span the C-terminus. A single iteration
on OWL28.1 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
