FLGBIOSNFLIP
The fliL operon of Escherichia coli contains seven genes (including fliO,
fliP, fliQ and fliR) involved in the biosynthesis and functioning of the
flagellar organelle [1]. The fliO, fliP, fliQ and fliR genes encode highly
hydrophobic polypeptides. On the basis of DNA sequence analysis and in vivo
protein expression, the fliP gene product appears to be synthesised as a 
precursor, with an N-terminal signal peptide of 21 amino acids [1]. The FliP
protein shows similarity to proteins encoded by a DNA sequence upstream of
the flaA gene of Rhizobium meliloti, to a gene involved in pathogenicity in
Xanthomonas campestris pv. glycines and to the spa24 gene of the Shigella
flexneri [1]. The gene products of the latter two appear to be involved in
protein translocation, suggesting a similar function in FliP [1]. 

FliP is an ~30kDa protein containing three or four transmembrane (TM) regions.
Proteins sharing an evolutionary relationship with FliP have been found in 
a wide range of bacteria and are involved in a variety of signal-peptide 
independent secretion systems (e.g., mopC, hrcR, hrpW, spaP, yscR).

FLGBIOSNFLIP is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
the flagellar biosynthetic FliP proteins. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short 
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing
on those sections that characterise the Flip proteins but distinguish 
them from the type III secretion system inner membrane P protein family - 
motif 1 spans the N-terminus of putative TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the
C-terminus of TM domain 2 and part of the following loop; and motifs 3 and
4 reside in the loop between TM domains 2 and 3. Two iterations on 
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 9 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also 
found, all of which are FliP proteins that fail to match one or more motifs.
