VASOACTVEIPR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that   
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-   
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the   
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct   
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,   
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in   
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like   
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating   
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.       

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid   
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-   
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM'
signature.      

Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) has a wide physiological profile.
In the periphery, it induces relaxation in smooth muscle; inhibits
secretion in certain tissues, but stimulates secretion in others; and
modulates activity of cells in the immune system [6]. In the CNS, it has a
range of both excitatory and inhibitory actions. VIP receptors are
distributed widely in the periphery, and occur throughout the gastro-
intestinal tract and genitourinary system, other smooth muscles and
secretory glands. In the CNS, they are found abundantly in, e.g. the cortex,
hippocampus and thalamus [6]. All VIP receptors activate adenylyl cyclase.

VASOACTVEIPR is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
vasoactive intestinal peptide receptors. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within the N- and C-termini, focusing on those areas of the
alignment that characterise the VIP receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the secretin-like family - motifs 1-3 lie in the N-terminal region
preceding the first TM domain, and motif 4 lies at the C-terminus. Two
iterations on OWL27.0 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 6 sequences was identified. Seven partial matches were
also found, all of which are members of the secretin-like family.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
