PROAMNOPTASE
Proteolytic enzymes that use serine in their catalytic machinery are 
widespread and numerous, being found in viruses, bacteria and eukaryotes
[1]. They encompass a range of peptidase activity, including exopeptidase,
endopeptidase, oligopeptidase and omega-peptidase. More than 20 serine
protease families (denoted S1 - S27) have been identified, which have been
grouped into 6 clans (SA, SB, SC, SE, SF and SG) on the basis of structural
and functional similarities [1]. Structures are known for four of the clans
(SA, SB, SC and SE): these appear to be unrelated, suggesting at least four
evolutionary origins of serine peptidase, and possibly many more [1].

There are similarities in the reaction mechanisms of several peptidases
from different evolutionary origins. Chymotrypsin, subtilisin and
carboxypeptidase C clans exploit a catalytic triad of serine, aspartate
and histidine, in which serine acts as a nucleophile, aspartate as an
electrophile and histidine as a base [1]. The geometric orientations of
the catalytic residues are similar between families, despite different 
protein folds [1]. The linear arrangement of the catalytic residues
commonly reflect clan relationships. For example, in the chymotrypsin clan
(SA), the catalytic triad is ordered HDS, whereas it is ordered DHS in the
subtilisin clan (SB), and SDH in the carboxypeptidase clan (SC) [1,2].

Prolyl aminopeptidase is an ~350 residue serine peptidase that selectively
cleaves N-terminal proline residues [1,3]. Sequence analysis has indicated
similarity to the carboxypeptidase C family (S8), and hence this peptiase
can be grouped into the SC clan [1].

PROAMNOPTASE is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
proline aminopeptidase family (S33) of serine peptidases. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions within the N-terminal portion of the alignment -
motif 2 contains an aspartate that may be involved in catalysis; and motif
3 includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern LIPASE_SER (PS00120), which
contains the active serine. Two iterations on OWL29.3 were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 21 sequences was
identified. Three partial matches were also found, all of which lack the
portion of sequence bearing motif 1.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 24 sequences, and 6
partial matches.
