MELNOCYTESHR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Melanocyte-stimulating hormones (MSH), adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH) and
beta-endorphin are peptide products of pituitary pro-opiomelanocortin. 
MSH has a trophic action on melanocytes, and regulates pigment production
in fish and amphibia [6]. The MSH receptor is expressed in high levels in
melanocytes, melanomas and their derived cell lines [6]. Receptors are
found in low levels in the CNS. MSH regulates temperature control in the
septal region of the brain and releases prolactin from the pituitary.

MELNOCYTESHR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
melanocyte stimulating hormone receptors. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on
those areas of the alignment that characterise the MSH receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the melanocortin receptors - motifs 1 and
2 were drawn from the N-terminal region preceding TM domain 1; motif 3
spans the first external loop; motif 4 lies at the N-terminus of TM domain
3; motifs 5 and 6 span the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 7 resides in
the C-terminal region following TM domain 7. Two iterations on OWL27.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, largely
MSH or melanocortin receptor fragments.

An update on SPTR55_38f identified a true set of 186 sequences, and
numerous partial matches, all of which are family members that fail to
make significant matches with one or more motifs.
