THERMOLYSIN
Metalloproteases are the most diverse of the four main types of protease,
with more than 30 families identified to date [1]. Of these, approximately
half contain the HEXXH motif, which has been shown in crystallographic
studies to form part of the metal-binding site [1]. The HEXXH motif is 
quite common in proteins, but can be more stringently defined for metallo-
proteases as abXHEbbHbc, where a is most often valine or threonine and 
forms part of the S1' subsite in thermolysin and neprilysin, b is an
uncharged residue, and c is a hydrophobic residue. Proline is never found
in this site, possibly because it would break the helical structure the
motif has been shown to form in metalloproteases [1].

Metalloproteases can be split into five groups on the basis of the metal-
binding residues: the first three contain the HEXXH motif, the other two
do not [1]. The first group contain an additional glutamic acid, which
completes the active site and are termed HEXXH+E: all families in this
group show some sequence similarity and have thus been grouped into clan
MA [1]. In the second group, a third histidine constitutes the extra metal-
binding residue: these are termed HEXXH+H and are grouped into clan MB [1].
The additional metal-binding residues in the third group are unidentified.
In the fourth group, the metal-binding residues are known, but in the fifth
group these residues are as yet unknown [1].

The thermolysin family (M4), part of the MA clan (HEXXH+E), is composed 
only of secreted eubacterial endopeptidases [1]. The zinc-binding residues
are H-142, H-146 and E-166, with E-143 acting as the catalytic residue [1].
Thermolysin also contains 4 calcium-binding sites, which contribute to its
unusual thermostability [1]. The family also includes enzymes from a number
of pathogens, including Legionella and Listeria, and the protein pseudolysin,
all with a substrate specificity for an aromatic residue in the P1' position
[1]. Three-dimensional structure analysis has shown that the enzymes undergo 
a hinge-bend motion during catalysis [1]. Pseudolysin has a broader
specificity, acting on large molecules such as elastin and collagen,
possibly due to its wider active site cleft [1].

THERMOLYSIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
thermolysin metalloprotease (M4) family. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions surrounding the active site - motif 2 includes the region encoded
by PROSITE pattern ZINC_PROTEASE (PS00142), which contains the HEXXH motif,
the His residues of which provide the zinc ligands, the Glu being the
active site residue; and motif 3 contains the additional metal-binding
residue (E-166). Three iterations on OWL29.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 34 sequences was
identified. Two partial matches were also found: A38166 is a probable
elastase precursor that lacks a match with motif 4; and SMP_SERMA is an
extracellular minor metalloprotease precursor, a member of the M4 family,
that lacks a match with motif 1.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 34 sequences, and 1
partial match.
