TYPE3IMSPROT
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens, such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[2] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [3]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [3], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

It is believed that the family of type III inner membrane proteins are 
used as structural moieties in a complex with several other subunits [4]. 
One such set of inner membrane proteins, labeled "S" here for nomenclature 
purposes, includes the Salmonella and Shigella SpaS, the Yersinia YscU, 
Rhizobium Y4YO, and the Erwinia HrcU genes [4]. The flagellar protein FlhB 
also shares similarity, probably due to evolution of the type III secretion 
system from the flagellar biosynthetic pathway. 

TYPE3IMSPROT is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type III secretion system inner membrane S protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 12 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~400 amino acids).
Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 32 sequences was identified. A single partial
match was also found, O87466, a type III pathway protein from Pseudomonas
syringae that fails to make a significant match with motif 1.
