HOMSERKINASE
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains containing the erg8-1 mutation are 
temperature sensitive for growth due to a defect in phosphomevalonate 
kinase, an enzyme of isoprene and ergosterol biosynthesis [1]. Subcloning
and DNA sequencing have defined the functional ERG8 regulon as an 850bp 
upstream region and an adjacent 1,272bp open reading frame [1]. The deduced 
ERG8 protein contains 424 residues and shows no similarity to known proteins,
except within a putative ATP-binding domain present in many kinases [1].

Enzymes that share the N-terminal Gly/Ser-rich putative ATP-binding region
include: galactokinase, homoserine kinase, mevalonate kinase and phospho-
mevalonate kinase. 

Homoserine kinase is a homodimeric enzyme involved in threonine bio-
synthesis. Sequence comparison of the yeast enzyme with the corresponding
proteins from bacterial sources reveals the presence of several highly
conserved regions, the pattern of occurrence of which suggests that the
ancestral sequences might have been composed from separate (functional)
domains [2]. A block of similar residues, found towards the C-terminus,
is also present in many other proteins involved in threonine (or serine)
metabolism; this motif may therefore represent the binding site for the
hydroxy-amino acids [2]. Limited similarity was detected between a motif
conserved among the homoserine kinases and consensus sequences found in
other mono- or dinucleotide-binding proteins [2].

HOMSERKINASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
homoserine kinases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 lies at the
N-terminus; motif 2 includes the C-terminal residues of the nucleotide-
binding sequence; and motif 5 lies at the C-terminus. Two iterations on
OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 18 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also 
found, all of which are fragments or homologues that fail to match one
or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences, and 1
partial match.
