KAPPAOPIOIDR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The term opioid refers to a class of substance that produces its effects
via the major classes of opioid receptor, termed mu, delta and kappa [6].
In the CNS, the kappa opioid receptor is found in the cerebral cortex,
substantia nigra, interpeduncular nucleus, striatum and hippocampus. In
the periphery, it is found in the myenteric plexus of the guinea pig ileum,
and it is also in certain smooth muscles, e.g. rabbit vas deferens [6].
K-opioid receptors are believed to mediate analgesia, sedation, miosis and
diuresis. Dynorphin is the most potent endogenous ligand.     

KAPPAOPIOIDR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
kappa opioid receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the K-opioid receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the opioid receptor family - motifs 1-3 were drawn
from the N-terminal region preceding TM domain 1; motifs 4 and 5 span the
second external loop; motif 6 spans the third external loop leading into
TM domain 7; and motif 7 was drawn from the C-terminus. A single iteration
on OWL27.1 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
