OPSINLTRLEYE
Opsins, the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision [1,2], are
integral membrane proteins that belong to a superfamily of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs). The activating ligands of the different superfamily
members vary widely in structure and character, yet the proteins appear
faithfully to have conserved a basic structural framework, believed to
consist of 7 transmembrane (TM) helices. Although the sequences of these
proteins are very diverse, reflecting to some extent this broad range of
activating ligands, nevertheless, motifs have been identified in the TM
regions that are characteristic of virtually the entire superfamily [3,4].
Amongst the exceptions are the olfactory receptors, which cluster together
in a subfamily, which lacks significant matches with domains 2, 4 and 6.
Interestingly, the opsins also seem to be emerging as increasingly atypical
of the superfamily, clustering most strongly, in phylogenetic analyses, with
the olfactory receptors [4]. 

The visual pigments comprise an apoprotein (opsin), covalently linked to
the chromophore 11-cis-retinal. The covalent link is in the form of a
protonated Schiff base between the retinal and a lysine residue located in
TM domain 7. Vision is effected through the absorption of a photon by the
chromophore, which is isomerised to the all-trans form, promoting a
conformational change in the protein.

Opsins are the photoreceptors of animal retinas [5]: vertebrate rhodopsin
is found in rod cells and mediates scotopic vision; red, green and blue
opsins are found in cone cells and mediate photopic vision. The opsins from
the lateral eyes and median ocelli of the horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus,
are likely to be the visible-wavelength rhodopsins in this animal [6]. In
the lateral eye, expression of the opsin gene is restricted to the photo-
receptor cells of the ommatidia [6]. Limulus opsins, and closely related
crayfish, mantid and honeybee rhodopsins, are most similar to the opsin
from the R1-6 photoreceptors of flies. 

OPSINLTRLEYE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
lateral eye and related opsins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the lateral eye opsins but distinguish
them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies at the
N-terminus; motif 2 lies at the C-terminus of TM domain 2; motif 3 lies in
the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs 4 and 5 lie at the C-terminus. A
single iteration on OWL28.1 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Several partial matches
were also found, all of which are Drosophila RH1/RH2 opsins. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 11 sequences, and 7
partial matches.
