NUCDPKINASE
Nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDK) is a required enzyme for synthesis of
nucleoside triphosphates (NTP) other than ATP. The enzyme acts via a
ping-pong mechanism in which a histidine residue is phosphorylated, by
transfer of the terminal phosphate group from ATP. In the presence of
magnesium, the phosphoenzyme can transfer its phosphate group to any NDP,
to produce an NTP. The enzyme thus furnishes NTPs for nucleic acid synthesis,
CTP for lipid synthesis, UTP for polysaccharide synthesis and GTP for
protein elongation, signal transduction and microtubule polymerisation.

In eukaryotes, NDK belongs to a family of isozymes, each of which acts in 
a different subcellular compartment and/or has a distinct biological
function. The isozymes form hexamers of related chains, designated A and B
[1]. Different associations of these chains (e.g., A6, A5B...AB5, B6)
result in isoenzymes with different isoelectric points.

NDK isozymes have been sequenced from both prokaryotic and eukaryotic 
sources. Drosophila abnormal wing disc protein has been shown to be a  
microtubule-associated NDK [2]. Mammalian NDK is also known as metastasis 
inhibition factor nm23. NDKs are highly conserved 17kDa proteins. Each
contains a single conserved histidine residue that participates in the
catalytic mechanism [2].

The X-ray structure of NDK from Dictyostelium discoideum has been determined
to 2.2A resolution [3]. The enzyme is a hexamer of identical subunits, with
a novel mononucleotide binding fold [3]. Each subunit contains an alpha/beta
domain with a four-stranded, anti-parallel beta-sheet. The topology differs
from that of adenylate kinase, but is identical to the allosteric domain of
Escherichia coli ATCase regulatory subunits, which bind mononucleotides at
an equivalent position [3]. Dimer contacts between NDK subunits within the 
hexamer are similar to those in ATCase. 

NUCDPKINASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
nucleoside diphosphate kinases. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the first beta-
strand and the first two alpha-helices; motif 2 spans helices 4 and 5; motif
3 encodes strand 3 and the N-terminal portion of helix 6; motif 4 spans
helices 7 and 8; and motif 5 spans strand 4 and helix 9. Two iterations on
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 62 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are related nucleoside diphosphate kinases that fail
to match one or more motifs.
