NERVYPROTEIN
Transcriptional activation and repression is required for control of
cell proliferation and differentiation during embryonic development and
homeostasis in the adult organism. Perturbations of these processes can
lead to the development of cancer [1]. The Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) gene
product is able to form complexes with corepressors and deacetylases,
such as nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR), which repress transcription
when recruited by transcription factors [2].

The ETO gene derives its name from its association with many cases of
acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML), in which a reciprocal translocation,
t(8;21), brings together a large portion of the ETO gene from chromosome
eight and part of the AML1 gene from chromosome 21. The human ETO gene
family currently comprises three major subfamilies: ETO/myeloid
transforming gene on chromosome 8 (MTG8); myeloid transforming gene related
protein-1 (MTGR1) and myeloid transforming gene on chromosome 16 (MTG16).

ETO proteins are composed of four evolutionarily conserved domains termed
nervy homology regions (NHR) 1-4. NHR1 is thought to stabilise the formation
of high molecular weight complexes, but is not directly responsible for
repressor activity. NHR2 and its flanking sequence comprise the core
repressor domain, which mediates 50% of the wild type repressor activity.
Furthermore, there is evidence that the amphipathic helical structure of
NHR2 promotes the formation of ETO/AML1 homodimers [1]. NHR3 and NHR4 have
been shown to act in concert to bind N-CoR. NHR4 contains two zinc finger
motifs, which are thought to play a role in protein interactions rather
than DNA binding [2].

The ultrabithorax (Ubx) gene is a homeotic gene in Drosophila that
determines the morphological characteristics of each segment. Ubiquitous
expression of Ubx gave rise to increased expression of several mRNAs; one
of these transcripts was localised to the nervous system precursor cells of
the head, thoracic and abdominal segments, and was termed nervy. Analysis of
nervy cDNA revealed that it shared significant sequence similarity with the
human ETO gene; it was also found to contain a region of similarity to the 
TATA binding protein-associated factor TAF110 [3].

NERVYPROTEIN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
Drosophila nervy protein. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise nervy proteins but distingguish them from closely related ETO
family members - motif 1 resides at the N-terminus; motif 2 lies within the
TAF110 region; motifs 3 and 4 lie at the C-terminal end of the TAF110 
region; and motifs 5-7 are located towards the C-terminus. A single 
iteration on SPTR40_22f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
