LANCEUKARYTE
The LanC-like protein superfamily encompasses a highly divergent group of
peptide-modifying enzymes, including the eukaryotic and bacterial 
lanthionine synthetase C-like proteins (LanC) [1-3]; subtilin biosynthesis
protein SpaC from Bacillus subtilis [4,5]; epidermin biosynthesis protein
EpiC from Staphylococcus epidermidis [6]; nisin biosynthesis protein NisC 
from Lactoccocus lactis [7-9]; GCR2 from Arabidopsis thaliana [10]; and
many others.  

The 3D structure of the lantibiotic cyclase from L.lactis has been
determined by X-ray crystallography to 2.5A resolution [11]. The globular
structure is characterised by an all-alpha fold, in which an outer ring
of helices envelops an inner toroid composed of 7 shorter, hydrophobic 
helices. This 7-fold hydrophobic periodicity has led several authors to 
claim various members of the family, including eukaryotic LanC-1 and GCR2,
to be novel G protein-coupled receptors [10,12]; some of these claims have
since been corrected [2,13,14].

The eukaryotic lanthionine synthetase C-like proteins 1-3, are relatives of
the bacterial lanthionine synthetase components C (LanC) [1-3]. They are
ubiquitous in nature, being variously expressed in brain, spinal chord,
pituitary gland, kidney, heart, skeletal muscle, pancreas, ovary and
testis. LanC-like protein 2 is a bystander gene coamplified and over-
expressed with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in 20% of
glioblastomas; its exogenous expression in a sarcoma cell line decreases
the expression of ABCB1 (P-glycoprotein 1) and increases cellular
sensitivity to the anticancer drug adriamycin [3].

LANCEUKARYTE is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
eukaryotic LanC-like protein family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the eukaryotic LanC proteins but distinguish 
them from closely related members of the LanC-like protein superfamily.
Four iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 24 sequences was identified. Numerous partial 
matches were also found, all of which are members of the LanC-like 
superfamily that fail to make significant matches with one or more motifs.
