LTB1RECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Leukotrienes (LT) are potent lipid mediators derived from arachidonic acid
metabolism. They can be divided into two classes, based on the presence or
absence of a cysteinyl group. Leukotriene B4 (LTB4) does not contain such a
group, whereas LTC4, LTD4, LTE4 and LTF4 are cysteinyl leukotrienes [6].

LTB4 is one of the most effective chemoattractant mediators known, and is
produced predominantly by neutrophils and macrophages. It is involved in a
number of events, including: stimulation of leukocyte migration from the
bloodstream; activation of neutrophils; inflammatory pain; host defense
against infection; increased interleukin production and transcription [8].
It is found in elevated concentrations in a number of inflammatory and
allergic conditions, such as asthma, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis and
inflammatory bowel disease, and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
these diseases [6,8].

Binding sites for LTB4 have been observed in membrane preparations from
leukocytes, macrophages and spleen. Two receptors for LTB4 have since been
cloned (BLT1 and BLT2); both are members of the rhodopsin-like G protein-
coupled receptor superfamily [7].

The leukotriene B4 type 1 receptor (BLT1) has been cloned from human, mouse,
rat and guinea pig, and was found to be identical to a previously cloned
receptor, P2Y7 [7,9]. This receptor was originally thought to be a
purinoceptor but is now widely accepted to bind LTB4. BLT1 has also been
reported to act as a coreceptor for macrophage-tropic HIV1 strains [9]. BLT1
is expressed primarily in peripheral leukocytes and peritoneal macrophages,
with lower levels of expression detected in the spleen and thymus of humans
[9]. Activation of the receptor by LTB4 leads to the production of inositol
trisphosphate and an increase in intracellular calcium levels. This response
is sensitive to pertussis toxin in some cell types. The receptor also causes
chemotaxis and inhibition of forskolin-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity 
in a pertussis toxin sensitive manner. It has been demonstrated that BLT1
can couple to Gi2 and G16 G proteins, depending on the cell type in which
it is expressed [7].

LTB1RECEPTOR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
leukotriene B4 type 1 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within the N- and C-termini and loop regions, focusing on those areas of
the alignment that characterise the leukotriene B4 type 1 receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the leukotriene B4 receptor family - motif
1 spans the N-terminus; motif 2 encodes the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 3
encodes the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans part of TM domain 6,
leading into the third external loop; and motifs 5 and 6 reside within the
C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified.
