ALPHATUBULIN
Microtubules are polymers of tubulin, a dimer of two 55kDa subunits, 
designated alpha and beta [1,2]. Within the microtubule lattice, alpha-beta
heterodimers associate in a head-to-tail fashion, giving rise to microtubule 
polarity. Fluorescent labelling studies have suggested that tubulin is
oriented in microtubules with beta-tubulin toward the plus end [3]. 

For maximal rate and extent of polymerisation into microtubules, tubulin 
requires GTP. Two molecules of GTP are bound at different sites, termed N 
and E. At the E (Exchangeable) site, GTP is hydrolysed during incorporation
into the microtubule. Close to the E site is an invariant region rich in 
glycine residues, which is found in both chains and is thought to control
access of the nucleotide to its binding site [4]. 

Most species, excepting simple eukaryotes, express a variety of closely-
related alpha- and beta-isotypes. A third family member, gamma-tubulin, has
also been identified in a number of species [5].

British type familial amyloidosis is an autosomal dominant disease 
characterised by progressive dementia, spastic paralysis and ataxia [6]. 
Amyloid deposits from the brain tissue of an individual who died with this 
disease have been characterised. Trypsin digestion and subsequent N-terminal
sequence analysis yielded a number of short sequences, all of which are
tryptic fragments of the C-termini of human alpha- and beta-tubulin [6]. 
Consistent with the definition of amyloid, synthetic peptides based on the 
sequences of these fragments formed fibrils in vitro, suggesting that the
C-termini of both alpha- and beta-tubulin are closely associated with the
amyloid deposits of this type of amyloidosis [6]. 

Several alpha-tubulin isotypes have been described, each distinguished by 
the presence of unique amino acid substitutions within the coding region [7]. 
Most of these isotype-specific amino acids are clustered at the C-terminus.
Patterns of developmental expression of the various alpha-tubulin isotypes
have been studied [7]. Results suggest that individual tubulin isotypes 
confer functional specificity on different kinds of microtubules [7]. 

ALPHATUBULIN is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for alpha-
tubulins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 25 
sequences. The motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full 
alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the alpha
tubulins but distinguish them from the rest of the tubulin family. Three 
iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point 
a true set comprising 119 sequences was identified. Several partial matches 
were also found, most of which are alpha-tubulins that fail to make 
significant matches with one or more motifs, and three of which are gamma 
tubulins that match two or three motifs.
