VDCCGAMMA5
Voltage-dependent calcium channels are a diverse family of proteins that 
encompass a variety of biological functions, including presynaptic
neurotransmitter release and protein signalling within the cell [1,2]. The
high voltage-activated (L-, N-, P-, Q- and R-type) channels comprise the 
alpha-1 subunit, which creates the pore for the import of extracellular 
calcium ions [2]. The activity of this pore is modulated by 4 tightly-
coupled subunits: an intracellular beta subunit; a transmembrane (TM) gamma 
subunit; and a disulphide-linked complex of alpha-2 and delta subunits, 
which are proteolytically cleaved from the same gene product [3,4].

The voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma (VDCCG) subunit family consists 
of at least 8 members, which share a number of common structural features 
[5]. Each member is predicted to possess 4 TM domains, with intracellular
N- and C-termini. The first extracellular loop contains a highly conserved
N-glycosylation site and a pair of conserved cysteine residues. The 
C-terminal 7 residues of VDCCG-2, -3, -4 and -8 are also conserved and 
contain a consensus site for phosphorylation by cAMP and cGMP-dependent
protein kinases, and a target site for binding by PDZ domain proteins [5].

The VDCCG-5 subunit was identified by genomic database searching, pursuing 
sequences similar to VDCCG-1 and -2 [6}. Mouse, human and rat isoforms have
been cloned. VDCCG-5 is expressed in a range of tissues, including brain,
kidney and testis [5].

VDCCGAMMA5 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma-5 subunits. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the N-terminal third of the alignment, 
focusing on those sections that characterise the VDCCG-5 subunits but 
distinguish them from other family members - motif 1 encodes part of the N-
terminus and the N-terminal portion of TM domain 1; motif 2 resides in TM
domain 1; and motif 3 lies in the first extracellular loop. Two iterations
on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 4 sequences was identified.
