NPFFRECEPTR2
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Neuropeptide FF (and neuropeptide AF, which is also derived from the same
precursor) belong to a family of neuropeptides containing an RF-amide motif
at their C-terminus [6]. Neuropeptide FF (NPFF) is found at high
concentrations in the posterior pituitary, spinal cord, hypothalamus and
medulla and is believed to be involved in pain modulation, opioid tolerance,
cardiovascular regulation, memory and neuroendocrine regulation [6,7]. Two G
protein-coupled receptors for NPFF have been identified; both are expressed
in the central nervous system and couple to Gi proteins to inhibit adenylyl
cyclase [7-9].

The type 2 neuropeptide FF receptor is expressed at high levels in the
thymus and placenta, with moderate levels in the pituitary, spleen, testis
and brain. Low levels were detected in the spinal cord, pancreas, small
intestine, uterus, stomach, lung, heart and skeletal muscle. No expression
was detected in liver or kidney [7].

NPFFRECEPTR2 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
type 2 neuropeptide FF receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
sections within N- and C-terminal and loop regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the type 2 neuropeptide FF receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the neuropeptide FF receptor family -
motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 is located at the C-terminus of TM
domain 2, leading into the first external loop; motif 3 resides in the
second external loop; motif 4 lies in the third external loop; and motifs 5
and 6 reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.
