NRPEPTIDEY5R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is one of the most abundant peptides in mammalian
brain, inducing a variety of behavioural effects (e.g., stimulation of food
intake, anxiety, facilitation of learning and memory, and regulation of the
cardiovascular and neuroendocrine systems) [6]. In the periphery, NPY 
stimulates vascular smooth muscle contraction and modulates hormone
secretion. NPY has been implicated in the pathophysiology of hypertension, 
congestive heart failure, affective disorders and appetite regulation [6].

Several pharmacologically distinct neuropeptide Y receptors have been 
characterised, designated NPY Y1-Y6. The Y5 receptor is a 456-residue
protein with less than 35% overall identity to known Y-type receptors [7].
The messenger RNA is found primarily in the central nervous system,
including the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus [7]. Y5 receptors
have been postulated to be the 'feeding' receptors, and may provide new 
approaches for the study and treatment of obesity and eating disorders [7]. 

NRPEPTIDEY5R is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
neuropeptide Y5 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the Y5 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the neuropeptide Y family - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus,
leading into TM domain 1; motifs 3 and 4 span the C-terminus of TM domain
3, the second cytoplasmic loop and the N-terminal portion of TM domain 4;
motifs 5 and 6 span the C-terminal portion of TM domain 4 and the second
external loop; motifs 7-10 span the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 11 spans
the third external loop; and motif 12 resides at the C-terminus. Two 
iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 3 sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
