INTRLKN1R1F
Interleukin-1 alpha and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 alpha and IL-1 beta) are 
cytokines that participate in the regulation of immune responses,
inflammatory reactions, and hematopoiesis [1]. Two types of IL-1 receptor, 
each with three extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains, limited
sequence similarity (28%) and different pharmacological characteristics
have been cloned from mouse and human cell lines: these have been termed 
type I and type II receptors [2]. The receptors both exist in transmembrane
(TM) and soluble forms: the soluble IL-1 receptor is thought to be post-
translationally derived from cleavage of the extracellular portion of the
membrane receptors [2].

Both IL-1 receptors appear to be well conserved in evolution, and map to the
same chromosomal location [3]. The receptors can both bind all three forms 
of IL-1 (IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta and IL-1RA) [3]. The mature type I IL-1 
receptor consists of (i) a ligand binding portion comprising three Ig-like
domains; (ii) a single TM domain; and (iii) a large cytoplasmic domain of 
~215 amino acids. This domain is shared by a number of other proteins, 
including the rat FIT-1M precursor, the murine ST2L protein precursor,
human oligophrenin-4 and interleukin-18 receptor accessory protein, and
Drosophila toll-like proteins.

INTRLKN1R1F is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
interleukin-1 receptor type I family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment, focusing 
on those sections that characterise members of the interleukin-1 receptor
type I family but distinguish them from other members of the interleukin-1
receptor family - motif 1 encodes the putative TM domain; and motifs 2-7 
span the cytoplasmic domain. Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 20 sequences was 
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are 
Drosophila toll-like proteins that fail to make significant matches with
one or more motifs.
