SYCDCHAPRONE
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens, such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[1] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [1]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [1], type III subunits in the outer membrane 
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

Effector proteins secreted by the type III system do not possess a secretion 
signal, and are considered unique because of this [1]. Yersinia spp. secrete 
effector proteins called YopB and YopD through the type III needle [2]. Both 
are believed to act as pore translocases, forming apertures in the host cell 
membrane and allowing the bacterium easy access to its cytoplasm [2,3]. YopD
also acts as a negative regulator of the Yersinia low-calcium response, and 
in turn is controlled by a chaperone, SycD [3]. This protein also regulates
YopB secretion. SycD is located on the Yop pathogenicity island of Yersinia 
spp., and is speculated to prevent a premature interaction between YopB, 
YopD and the calcium-response LcrV protein [4]. 

It has been speculated that a type III secretion mechanism also exists in
Chlamydial species. With the sequencing of the Chlamydia trachomatis genome,
several proteins similar to characterised type III proteins have emerged, 
including a SycD homologue [5]. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa gene PcrH is also 
similar to the Yersinia chaperone, suggesting a comparable function.

SYCDCHAPRONE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Gram-negative bacterial type III secretion SycD chaperone protein family.
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the
motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually the full
alignment length. Two iterations on SPTR39_17f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified.
Several partial matches were also found: those matching 3 motifs include a
Chlamydial type III secretion chaperone and a low calcium response protein,
which fail to make signficant matches with motif 2; those that match 2
motifs include invasion and pathogenicity proteins from Shigella
dysenteriae, Thermoplasma acidophilum and Escherichia coli.
