EP450ICYP2E
P450 enzymes constitute a superfamily of haem-thiolate proteins [1], widely
distributed in bacteria, fungi, plants and animals. The enzymes are involved
in metabolism of a plethora of both exogenous and endogenous compounds [2].
Usually, they act as terminal oxidases in multi-component electron transfer
chains, called P450-containing monooxygenase systems.

Current P450 nomenclature, based on divergent evolution of the P450
superfamily, was proposed and developed by Nebert et al. [3]. On the basis
of sequence similarity, all P450s can be categorised into 2 main classes,
the so-called B- and E-classes: P450 proteins of prokaryotic 3-component
systems and fungal P450nor (CYP55) belong to the B-class; all other known
P450s from distinct systems are of the E-class [4]. E-class P450s may be
further divided into 5 subclasses (groups) according to protein sequence
similarities. The data suggest that divergence of the P450 superfamily 
into B- and E-classes, and further divergence into stable P450 groups 
within the E-class, must be very ancient and had occured before the 
appearance of eukaryotes. 

Due to the rapid increase in numbers of P450s, Nelson introduced the concept
of a higher order classification of P450 families into clans [3] based on
sequence similarity. This is similar to the previous grouping into B- and
E-classes; both classifications are still used. According to Nelson's
system, clan 2 contains the CYP2 plus CYP1, 17, 18, 21 and 71 families, and
corresponds to the E-class group I proteins [5,6]. Members of the first 4
families are of vertebrate origin, while those from CYP71 derive from plants.
CYP1 and CYP2 enzymes mainly metabolise exogenous substrates, whereas CYP17
and CYP21 are involved in metabolism of endogenous physiologically-active
compounds. 

The CYP2 family, comprising 15 subfamilies (A-H, J-N, P and Q), is the most
dominant in clan 2. Six of these subfamilies are non-mammalian: 2H derives
from chicken; 2K, 2M, 2N and 2P are from fish; 2L is from lobster; and 2Q
from Xenopus [5]. The first five (A-E) are present in mammalian liver, but
in differing amounts and with different inducibilities [7]. These five 
subfamilies show varied substrate specificities, with some degree of 
overlap. There is growing evidence for the involvement of 2E in the 
activation of carcinogens and other toxic chemicals, although isozymes
in this subfamily also exhibit detoxifying metabolic pathways. In addition
to oxygenations, 2E is able to carry out reductive dehalogenation reactions
under low oxygen conditions, and this usually gives rise to cytotoxic
species. The different 2E orthologues are highly similar across species,
resulting in the sole designation CYP2E1.

Although highly similar in terms of amino acid sequence, it is possible that
a number of key residue changes between mammalian 2E proteins may explain
some of the known species differences in substrate metabolism. Site-directed
mutagenesis of a threonine residue (Thr-301) in 2E1 has indicated that the
rate of metabolism of substrates can be altered by changing this residue,
and it is likely that the electronic properties of certain key atoms in the
substrate are also relevant to metabolism [7]. The CYP2E gene is located on
chromosome 10 in mouse and man [3].

EP450ICYP2E is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
CYP2E P450 family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise the CYP2E proteins but distinguish them from the rest of the
CYP2 family - using the model of Graham-Lorence and Peterson [8], motifs 1
and 2 span the N-terminal membrane anchor domain; motif 3 encodes the 
N-terminus of the I helix; and motif 4 resides between the J and K helices. 
Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 11 sequences was identified.
