LYSISCOLICIN
The DNA sequence of the entire colicin E2 operon has been determined [1].
The operon comprises the colicin activity gene (ceaB), the colicin immunity
gene (ceiB) and the lysis gene (celB), which is essential for colicin
release from producing cells [1]. A putative LexA binding site is located
upstream from ceaB, and a rho-independent terminator structure is located
downstream from celB [1]. Comparison of the amino acid sequences of colicin
E2 and cloacin DF13 reveal extensive similarity. These colicins have
different modes of action and recognise different cell surface receptors;
the two major regions of heterology at the C-terminus, and in the C-terminal
end of the central region are thought to correspond to the catalytic and 
receptor-recognition domains, respectively [1]. 

Sequence similarities between colicins E2, A and E1 [2] are less striking.
The colicin E2 (pyocin) immunity protein does not share similarity with
either the colicin E3 or cloacin DF13 [3] immunity proteins. By contrast,
the lysis proteins of the ColE2, ColE1 and CloDF13 plasmids are almost
identical except in the N-terminal regions, which themselves are similar to
lipoprotein signal peptides [1]. Processing of the ColE2 prolysis protein
to the mature form is prevented by globomycin, a specific inhibitor of the
lipoprotein signal peptidase [1]. The mature ColE2 lysis protein is located
in the cell envelope [1].

LYSISCOLICIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
colcin lysis proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 12 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length - motif lies within the putative signal sequence; and
motifs 2 and 3 span the rest of the polypeptide chain. Two iterations on
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 17 sequences was identified. A single partial match was also
found, O24683, a colicin U lytic protein from Shigella boydii that fails
to match motif 1.
