KISS1RECEPTR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The metastasis suppressor gene KiSS-1 encodes a number of RFamide-related 
peptides, the largest of which, metastin, contains 54 amino acids [6,7].
An orphan G protein-coupled receptor, GPR54, has been identified as a 
receptor for these peptides [6-8]. GPR54 is highly expressed in placenta, 
pituitary, pancreas and spinal cord [7]. Binding of KiSS-1-encoded peptides
to the receptor results in coupling to the Gq pathway, stimulating calcium
mobilisation, phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis, arachidonic acid release, 
ERK and p38 MAP kinase phosphorylation and stress fibre formation. It also
inhibits cell proliferation [7]. The distribution of GPR54, together with 
the finding that administration of KiSS-1 peptides in rat stimulates 
oxytocin secretion, suggests a role in regulation of endocrine function [7].

KISS1RECEPTR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
KiSS-1 peptide receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections 
within N- and C-terminal and loop regions, focusing on those areas of the 
alignment that characterise the KiSS-1 peptide receptors but distinguish 
them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 
encode the N-terminus; motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motifs 4 
and 5 are located in the first external loop; motif 6 spans the second
cytoplasmic loop; motif 7 lies in the second external loop; motifs 8 and 9
encode the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 10 lies in the C-terminus, 
immediately after TM domain 7. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was 
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.
