TNFACTORR10
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 10 is activated by TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand 
(TRAIL). Four subtypes of the receptor have been identified: TNF receptors
10A and 10B (also known as death receptor 4 and 5, respectively), which 
contain a death domain within their C-terminal regions, and TNF receptors
10C and 10D, in which the death domain is not present or is truncated. It 
has been suggested that the function of the latter two receptors may be to 
inhibit TRAIL cytotoxicity by competing with the other TRAIL receptors for
binding of the ligand [7,8].

TNFACTORR10 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 10. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in 
the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise TNF receptor 10 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - all motifs lie in the N-terminal extracellular region. Two 
iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 10 sequences was identified. A single partial match
was also found, A6QNP5_BOVIN, a short translated bovine mRNA that fails to
match motif 3.
