LCACHANNELB2
Calcium channels are generally discriminated by their biophysical and/or
pharmacological sensitivity. L-type calcium channels are distinguished by
their modulation by compounds such as dihydropyridines. These channels
tend to be localised mainly around the neuronal cell body, where they
influence calcium-dependent modulation and excitation-transcription coupling,
but are also found in skeletal and cardiac muscle, where they play a role in
excitation-contraction coupling and action potential shaping, respectively.

L-type calcium channnels are formed from different alpha-1 subunit isoforms
that determine the pharmacological properties of the channel, since they
form the drug binding domain. Other properties, such as gating voltage-
dependence, G protein modulation and kinase susceptibility, are influenced 
by alpha-2, delta and beta subunits [1].

Co-expression of beta subunit mRNA with alpha-1 subunit mRNA in xenopus
oocytes produces increased calcium currents, which are accompanied by a
shift in the voltage-dependence of activation to more negative membrane
potentials. Conversely, microinjection of antisense oligonucleotides to 
beta subunit mRNA produces decreased calcium currents and shifts voltage-
dependent activation to more positive membrane potentials. There are
four distinct beta subunits: beta-1, beta-2, beta-3 and beta-4; and the
magnitude of these effects varies with the particular subtype [2].

There are 4 splice variants of the beta-2 subunit: beta-2a, beta-2b, beta-2c
and beta-2d. Beta-2a and beta-2b are expressed in animal heart, aorta and 
brain, and are 606- and 632-residue proteins, respectively. Beta-2c and
beta-2d (655 and 604 residues, respectively) are expressed in brain, recent
studies showing beta-2c to be expressed also in heart. All splice variants
differ in their N-terminal regions [3].

LCACHANNELB2 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
L-type calcium channel beta-2 subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the beta-2 subunits but distinguish them from 
the rest of the L-type calcium channel beta subunits. Two iterations on
SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 9 sequences was identified.
