KV33CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].
 
Structurally, Kv channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-
gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and
3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+
channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif
that resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane spanning helices, and
forms the K+-selective pore domain [1-2].

The Kv family can be divided into 4 subfamilies on the basis of sequence
similarity and function: Shaker (Kv1), Shab (Kv2), Shaw (Kv3) and Shal 
(Kv4). All consist of pore-forming alpha subunits that associate with 
different types of beta subunit. To form a functional K+ channel pore,
4 alpha subunits and 4 beta subunits are required. The alpha subunits
have 6 well-conserved TM domains, a pore loop region and variable length
N- and C-termini. TM domains 5 and 6, and the loop region, form the K+ 
channel pore through which the K+ ions pass [3]. 

The shaw gene was first isolated from Drosophila. Several vertebrate K+
channels with similar amino acid sequences were subsequently found and,
together with the Drosophila Shaw channel, now constitute the Shaw (Kv3)
family. These channels are thought to play a role in shortening of action
potential durations and modulating pre-synaptic neurotransmitter release.
In mammals, the family consists of 4 genes (Kv3.1, Kv3.2, Kv3.3 and Kv3.4).
Each gene product has its own subcellular location and function [4].

Kv3.3 channels are evenly distributed over the soma and proximal apical
dendrites. They have also been found in the lens epithelium, corneal
endothelium, cerebellar cells and the deep cerebellar nuclei. When
co-expressed with NADPH oxidase, they function as an oxygen sensor complex
in airway chemoreceptors [4].

KV33CHANNEL is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kv3.3 voltage-gated K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motifs 1-4 lie in the N-terminus; motif
5 is located in the first putative TM domain; and motif 6 is situated in the
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
