GPR1ORPHANR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Several 7TM receptors have been cloned but their endogenous ligands are
unknown; these have been termed orphan receptors. Several novel human genes 
encoding GPCRs that most closely resemble peptide binding receptors have
been isolated and characterised [6]. Gene GPR1, which is intronless in the
coding region, encodes a receptor that shares identity in the TM regions
with the opioid receptors. GPR1 transcripts are expressed in the human
hippocampus [6]. By contrast, the rat GPR1 gene is not expressed in
hippocampus, demonstrating a functional variation for this receptor in 
these two species [7]. 

GPR1ORPHANR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
GPR1 orphan receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the
GPR1 orphan receptor but distinguish it from related members of the 
rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus; motif
3 lies in the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 4 and 5 span the second 
external loop; motif 6 spans the third cytoplasmic loop and the N-terminus
of TM domain 6; motif 7 lies in the third external loop; and motifs 8 and 9
reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to 
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting
set.
