5HT4RECEPTR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

5-Hydroxytryptamine (or serotonin) is ubiquitous in plants and animals.
It is an important neurotransmitter and local hormone in the CNS and
instestine, and is implicated in a vast array of physiological and patho-
physiological pathways [6]. In the periphery, 5HT contracts a number of
smooth muscles, and induces endothelium-dependent vasodilation through
the formation of NO [6]. It is a mediator of peristalsis, and may be
involved in platelet aggregation and homeostasis. In the CNS, 5HT is
believed to be involved in a wide range of functions, including the
control of appetite, mood, anxiety, hallucinations, sleep, vomiting and
pain perception [6]. 5HT receptor ligands are of clinical use in the
treatment of depression, migraine and post-operative vomiting.

Numerous receptor subtypes have been classified according to their
antagonist susceptibilities and their affinities for 5HT. Five 5HT1
subtypes and at least three 5HT2 subtypes have now been identified, in
addition to subtypes 5HT3-7 [6]. All share a high degree of sequence
similarity, and have overlapping pharmacological specificities.

The 5H4 receptor is found in neurons in the CNS, with highest levels in
colliculus and hippocampus [6]. In the periphery, it is found in myenteric
neurons in ileum and in smoothe muscle (e.g., rat oesophagus and heart
muscle) [6]. The receptor is linked to the adenylyl cyclase pathway via
Gs [6].

5HT4RECEPTR is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
5-hydroxytryptamine 4 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise the 5HT4 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the
5HT family - motif 1 resides at the N-terminus; motif 2 spans the first
cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 2, leading into
the first external loop; motif 4 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 
5 and 6 span the second external loop; motifs 7 and 8 span the third 
cytoplasmic loop; motif 9 lies in the third external loop; and motifs 10
and 11 reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL31.1 was required
to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the 
starting set. Three partial matches were also found, all of which are
fragments that lack portions of sequence bearing the N- and C-terminal
motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
