MNSODISMTASE
Apergillus fumigatus is an important opportunistic fungal pathogen that 
causes a wide spectrum of diseases in humans, the most important of which
are allergic brochopulmonary aspergillosis, aspergilloma (via the 
colonisation of cavities in the lung), and disseminated aspergillosis (which 
occurs in immunocompromised individuals). Infection is often not recognised 
at an early stage, and, as a consequence, disseminated aspergillosis is 
frequently fatal. Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) from Aspergillus
fumigatus has been demonstrated to be an allergen sharing a high degree of
similarity with phylogenetically distant MnSODs. It represents a novel 
pan-allergen restricted to individuals sensitised to A.fumigatus [1-4].

MnSOD catalyses the reaction: 2 superoxide + 2H+ = O2 + H202.  During  
catalysis, which is limited at micromolar levels of superoxide by a 
peroxide-inhibited complex with the metal, MnSOD cycles between the Mn(II) 
and Mn(III) states. One of the major roles of MnSOD is in the protection of
mitochondria against the damaging effects of superoxide radicals: increased
expression of MnSOD protects cells and transgenic animals from various forms
of oxidative stress. Interestingly, increased levels of MnSOD have also been
shown to slow down cell growth and induce differentiation. The inhibition of
tumour cell growth can be attributed to the increase in the steady-state 
levels of H202 as a result of the increased activity of MnSOD. Alternations
in the steady-state concentrations of mitochondrial 02*- and H202, as a 
result of MnSOD overexpression, can alter the metabolic capacity of the
cell, leading to inhibition of cell growth [5-7].

Three evolutionarily distinct families of SOD are known: copper/zinc SOD
(an enzyme of eukaryotes and certain prokaryotes); iron SOD (from
prokaryotes and some higher plants); and manganese SOD (from prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes). Although there is no similarity between the manganese and
the copper/zinc-containing classes, the iron- and manganese-SODs have very
similar 3D structures. These can be distinguished on the basis of several
single-site substitutions positioned in and close to the active site of the
enzyme. The ligands to the manganese metal are three histidines and one
aspartic acid, which are present in identical positions in the iron protein.
Compared to the copper/zinc enzyme, the metal sites of the iron/manganese
protein are much nearer the dimer interfaces. 

MnSOD has been shown to form both tetramers and dimers. The monomer fold is 
similar in both cases, comprising two domains, with both N-terminal helical
hairpin- and C-terminal alpha/beta domains contributing residues to the
catalytic site [1,2]. In the iron and manganese SODs, the metal centres are
~10A apart in the dimers, and there are several specific contacts made by
residues in the environment of the metal-binding sites that could afford 
a pathway for interaction between the two active centres [1].

MNSODISMTASE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
manganese superoxide dismutase family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 12 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 2 spans the
C-terminal portion of alpha-helix 1 and the N-terminus of helix 2, and
includes the first metal-binding His; motif 3 spans helix 4, and includes
the second metal-binding His; motif 4 encodes the N-terminal portion of
beta-strand 1; and motif 5 spans the C-terminus of strand 3 and helices 8
and 9, and includes the final metal-binding Asp and His ligands. Four
iterations on SPTR39_17f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 170 sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches
were also found, all of which are family members that fail to make 
significant matches with one or more motifs.
