IGFBPFAMILY5
Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs)-I and -II are small secreted peptides
that stimulate the survival, and promote the proliferation and
differentiation, of many cell types [1]. In biological fluids, these growth
factors are usually bound to IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs), which regulate
their availability and activity by prolonging their half-life and
modulating their receptor interactions.

To date, six IGFBP family members have been identified (termed IGFBP1-6)
[2]. They share a conserved gene (intron-exon) organisation and high IGF
binding affinity. Structurally, the proteins also share a common domain
architecture, possessing a conserved N-terminal IGFBP domain, a highly
variable mid-section, and a thyroglobulin type-1 (Tg1) domain in their
C-terminal regions.

In addition to their role in the regulation of IGF activity, there is
evidence for the direct association of IGFBPs with a variety of
extracellular and cell surface molecules [3,4], with consequent effects
upon important biological processes. These include modulation of bone cell
proliferation [5], and growth arrest of breast and prostate cancer cells
[3,6].

IGFBP5 is an essential regulator of physiological processes in bone, kidney
and mammary gland [7]. In common with IGFBP3, IGFBP5 contains a putative 
nuclear localisation signal in its C-terminal region, consistent with its
translocation to the nucleus of human breast cancer cells [8].

IGFBPFAMILY5 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions in the N- and C-terminal thirds of the alignment, 
focusing on those sections that characterise IGFBP5 but distinguish it from
other family members - motif 1 lies within the IGFBP domain, and motifs 2 
and 3 reside within the Tg1 domain. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 13 
sequences was identified.
