HISBINDING
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

The tick histamine binding proteins are the most recently identified set of 
outlier lipocalins. The structure of one tick histamine binding protein has
been solved [5] and has shown the proteins to have the characteristic 
lipocalin fold but without any appreciable sequence similarity. The tick
histamine binding proteins are secreted into the saliva of the ixodid tick 
Rhipicephalus appendiculatus and share functional similarity with the 
nitrophorins, sequestering histamine at the wound site. Because the tick
histamine binding proteins outcompete histamine receptors, they are able to
overcome host inflammatory and immune responses. This enables the ticks to
feed for extended periods, lasting from days to several weeks, and are able 
to gorge themselves on large blood meals increasing their body mass 100 fold.
Unlike nitrophorins, the tick proteins do not bind haem (or other cofactor),
but ligate histamine directly in two rigid orthogonally-arranged binding 
sites, at opposing ends of the lipocalin anti-parallel beta-barrel, which
have an unusually polar character.

HISBINDING is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tick 
histamine binding proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the first two N-terminal
helical sections; motif 2 spans the length of the first beta-strand; motif 3
covers the distal portion of the large loop L1 and the anterior region of 
the second beta-strand; motif 4 spans the second section of the fourth beta-
strand; motif 5 spans the seventh beta-strand; and motif 6 covers the length
of the long C-terminal alpha-helix. It should be noted that neither of these
sequences are detected by the PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213) nor by the
LIPOCALIN fingerprint (PR00179). Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required 
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 3 sequences was 
identified.
