TAP1PROTEIN
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily contains membrane
proteins that are responsible for the translocation of a variety of
substrates across membranes, using energy derived from ATP hydrolysis [1].
The ABC transporter genes are typically organised to encode either full
transporters that contain two hydrophobic transmembrane (TM) domains and
two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs), or half transporters that comprise
one TM and one NBD, with half transporters needing to form homo- or
heterodimers to produce functional transporters [1,2]. The ABCB2 gene
product is a half transporter that plays an essential role during antigen
processing, and contains both an N-terminal TM domain and a C-terminal NBD
[1,3-5].

During antigen processing, products of proteosomal degradation are 
translocated from the cytosol to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) by the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP), to
awaiting major histocompatibility complex class I molecules [3-6]. The
current model of a TAP transporter is of a heterodimer of ABCB2 and ABCB3
polypeptides, in which the TM segments of TAP form a pore in the membrane,
with the peptide-binding site located at the cytosolic mouth of this pore
[6]. The binding of peptide to TAP has been demonstrated to produce
conformational changes in TAP, with ABCB2 and ABCB3 each playing different
roles in peptide binding and translocation [6,7].

TAP1PROTEIN is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the B2
subfamily of ABC transporters. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those areas that 
characterise B2-subfamily half transporters but distinguish them from other 
members of the ABC transporter superfamily - motifs 1-6 reside in the the N-
terminal putative cytosolic domain; motif 7 lies in a putative TM helix; 
motif 8 lies in a putative ER lumenal loop; motif 9 lies in a putative TM 
helix; motif 10 resides in the putative cytosolic domain; and motifs 11 and 
12 lie in the cytosolic C-terminal NBD. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 14 
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, O94774, 
which appears to be a C-terminally truncated human TAP1.
