LATROPHILIN
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that   
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-   
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the   
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct   
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,   
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in   
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like   
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating   
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.       

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid   
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-   
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM'
signature.

Latrophilins are a family of secretin-like GPCRs that can be subdivided
into 3 subtypes: LPH1, LPH2 and LPH3. LPH1 is a brain-specific calcium
independent receptor of alpha-latrotoxin (LTX), a neurotoxin. It is the
affinity of this form of the receptor for LTX that gives the family its
name. LPH2 and LPH3, whilst sharing extensive sequence similarity to LPH1,
do not bind LTX. LPH2 is distributed throughout most tissues, whereas LPH3
is also brain-specific [6]. The endogenous ligand(s) for these receptors are
at present unknown. Binding of LTX to LPH1 stimulates exocytosis and the
subsequent release of large amounts of neurotransmitters from neuronal and
endocrine cells. The latrophilins possess up to 7 sites of alternative
splicing; the resulting number of possible splice variants leads to a highly
variable family of proteins.

LATROPHILIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
latrophilin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those areas of the
alignment that characterise the latrophilin receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the secretin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 reside in
the N-terminal domain; motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; and motif 4
lies in the C-terminal domain. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 26 sequences was
identified. Three partial matches were also found (Q4RZU0_TETNG, 
B6MUJ8_BRAFL and Q69HN9_CIOIN), all of which are family members that fail
to match the full complement of motifs.
