BCL2FAMILY
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death (PCD), is a common and evolutionarily 
conserved property of all metazoans [1]. In many biological processes, 
apoptosis is required to eliminate supernumerary or dangerous (e.g., pre-
cancerous) cells and to promote normal development. Thus, dysregulation  
of apoptosis can contribute to the development of many major diseases, 
including cancer, autoimmunity and neurodegenerative disorders. In most
cases, proteins of the caspase family execute the genetic programme that
leads to cell death. Bcl-2 proteins are central regulators of caspase
activation, and play a key role in cell death by regulating the integrity
of the mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes [2]. At 
least 20 Bcl-2 proteins have been reported in mammals, and several
others have been identified in viruses.

Bcl-2 family proteins fall roughly into three subtypes, which either promote 
cell survival (anti-apoptotic) or trigger cell death (pro-apoptotic). All 
members contain at least one of four conserved motifs, termed Bcl-2 Homology
(BH) domains. Bcl-2 subfamily proteins, which contain at least BH1 and BH2,
promote cell survival by inhibiting the adapters needed for the activation
of caspases. Pro-apoptotic members potentially exert their effects by dis-
placing the adapters from the pro-survival proteins; these proteins belong
either to the Bax subfamily, which contain BH1-BH3, or to the BH3 subfamily,
which mostly only feature BH3 [3]. Thus, the balance between antagonistic
family members is believed to play a role in determining cell fate.

Members of the wider Bcl-2 family, which also includes Bcl-x, Bcl-w and 
Mcl-1, are described by their similarity to Bcl-2 protein, a member of
the pro-survival Bcl-2 subfamily [3]. 

BCL2FAMILY is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Bcl-2 apoptosis regulator protein family. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 21 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment - motif 1
includes the N-terminus of BH1; motif 2 includes the C-terminus of BH1; and
motif 3 includes the N-terminus of BH2. Four iterations on SPTR44_27f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 83
sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches were also found, most of
which appear to be related members of the Bcl-2 family that fail to make
a significant match with motif 1.
