BAIPRECURSOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a
manner reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to inter-
act with G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been
proposed to account for this, there is no significant sequence similarity
between these families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own
unique '7TM' signature.

Three human secretin-like GPCRs that are expressed specifically in the
brain, and appear to have a role in the inhibition of angiogenesis, have
been identified and named BAI (brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor) 1-3
[6,7]. In addition to the characteristic 7 TM domains, the BAIs also have a
large extracellular domain containing a number of thrombospondin type 1 
repeats - these have been shown to inhibit in vivo angiogenesis induced by
bFGF in rat cornea [6]. BAI1 has been found to be transcriptionally 
regulated by p53 and is absent in many glioblastoma cell lines, suggesting
that it may play an important role in suppression of the disease [6].

BAIPRECURSOR is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor precursors. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise the brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitors
but distinguish them from the rest of the secretin-like superfamily - motif 
1 lies at the N-terminus of the extracellular domain; motifs 2-6 lie in the
C-terminal portion of the extracellular domain, between the thrombospondin
repeats and TM domain 1; motif 7 encodes the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 8
spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 9 lies in the second external loop;
motif 10 spans the third external loop; and motifs 11-13 lie at the
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR40_18f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
