TGFBETA1
The transforming growth factors-beta (TGF-beta 1-5) constitute a family of
multi-functional cytokines that regulate cell growth and differentiation [1].
Many cells synthesise TGF-beta, and essentially all have specific receptors 
for this peptide [2]. TGF-beta regulates the actions of many other peptide
growth factors and determines a positive or negative direction of their 
effects. The protein functions as a disulphide-linked homodimer. Its
sequence is characterised by the presence of several C-terminal cysteine
residues, which form interlocking disulphide links arranged in a knot-like
topology. A similar "cystine-knot" arrangement has been noted in the
structures of some enzyme inhibitors and neurotoxins that bind to voltage-
gated Ca2+ channels, although the precise topology here differs. 

The three-dimensional structures of several members of the TGF-beta super-
family have been deduced. The solution structure of human TGF-beta 1 has
been determined using multinuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy with
hybrid distance geometry/simulated annealing [6]. The structure shows a high
degree of similarity to that of TGF-beta 2, but there are several notable
differences in structure and flexibility, which might relate to function [6].

TGF-beta genes are expressed differentially, suggesting that the various TGF-
beta species may have distinct physiological roles in vivo. Examination of
TGF-beta 1 mRNA levels in adult murine tissues indicates that expression is
predominant in spleen, lung and placenta [7]. TGF-beta 1 is believed to play
important roles in pathologic processes.

TGFBETA1 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
transforming growth factor beta 1 precursor proteins. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on
those sections that characterise TGF-beta 1 proteins but distinguish them
from the rest of the TGF-beta superfamily. Two iterations on SPTR39_14f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11 
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, O93449,
a transforming growth factor beta precursor from Oncorhynchus mykiss
(Rainbow trout) that only matches motifs 2, 3 and 5.
