PAFRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Platelet-activating factor (PAF), a unique phospholipid mediator, possesses
potent proinflammatory, smooth-muscle contractile and hypotensive activities,
and appears to be crucial in the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma and in the
lethality of endotoxin and anaphylactic shock [6,7]. However, little is 
known of the molecular properties of the PAF receptor and related signal
transduction systems [6]. The gene for the human PAF receptor (PAFR) has
been isolated, and encodes a protein that is highly similar to the guinea
pig PAF receptor. Analysis of somatic cell hybrids suggests that PAFR is
encoded by a single gene on human chromosome 1 [6].

PAFRECEPTOR is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
platelet activating factor receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise the PAF receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 resides at the N-terminus; motifs 2
and 3 span the first cytoplasmic and external loops respectively; motif 4
spans the C-terminus of TM domain 3 and the second cytoplasmic loop; motif
5 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 4, leading into the second external 
loop; motif 6 lies in the second external loop; motif 7 encodes the third
cytoplasmic loop; motif 8 lies at the C-terminus of TM domain 6; motif 9
lies at the N-terminus of TM domain 7; and motifs 10 and 11 reside at the
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence,
no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
