A1MCGLOBULIN
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Alpha-1-microglobulin (A1M), also known as protein HC (for Heterogeneous 
Charge), is a low molecular weight protein component of plasma that has 
been studied extensively since its initial discovery in pathological human
urine. Although much is now known of its structure and properties, the
function and physiological role of A1M remains unclear, although the weight
of evidence suggests that it functions in the regulation of the immune
system [5]. 

A1M is known to exist in both a free form and complexed to other macro-
molecules: immunoglobulin A (IgA) in humans and alpha-1-inhibitor-3 in the
rat. Free A1M is a monomeric protein composed of one 188 residue polypeptide
and contains three cysteines, two of which (residues 75 and 173) form a 
conserved intra-molecuklar disulphide link [5]. A1M is glycosylated by 
three separate carbohydrate chains: two complex carbohydrates are N-linked 
to asparagines at residues 17 and 96, and the other simple carbohydrate is
O-linked to threonine at position 5. These three saccharide chains represent
3%, 12% and 7% respectively of the total molecular mass of A1M; thus 22% of 
the total molecular mass of the protein is derived from carbohydrate. Free
A1M is extremely heterogeneous in charge (appearing as a smear rather than
a sharp band in electrophoresis) and cannot be easily separated from a 
tightly-associated chromophore, which is responsible for the characteristic 
yellow-brown fluorescence of the free protein in aqueous solution [5]. 
Moreover, this chromophoric group, which is also responsible for the 
observed charge heterogeneity of A1M, is covalently bound to the free
cysteine residue at position 34. Hexane extraction of purified A1M 
indicates that the protein also binds retinol as a major (but not its only)
ligand, but that this is probably distinct from the its covalent chromophore.

The glycosylation is different between species. The principal sites of A1M 
synthesis are the liver and kidney. Half of all human plasma A1M (about 
0.03mg/ml) forms a 1:1 complex with about 5% of plasma immunoglobulin A: 
the resulting macromolecular complex has a molecular weight of 200000, and
a plasma concentration of 0.3mg/ml. It can exhibit both antibody activity 
and affect many of the biological actions of free A1M [5]. It has also been
shown that the components of this complex are linked, by a covalent
association of unknown type, between part of the C-terminal nine residues
of IgA and some part of A1M prior to Cys 75. The A1M-IgA complex does not
exhibit the charge heterogeneity and yellow-brown fluorescence of free A1M.
This would seem to imply that the chromophoric group joined to cysteine 34
is involved in this covalent link. More recently, a corresponding high 
molecular weight complex involving A1M has been isolated from rat serum: 
rather than IgA, this complex contains alpha-1-inhibitor 3 (A1I3), a variant
of rat plasma alpha-macroglobulin. This 1:1 A1M:A1I3 complex, molecular 
weight ~266,000, represents 1-3% of total plasma A1I3 and around 60% of 
plasma A1M. The lack of charge heterogeneity and fluorescence would suggest
that the complex is also covalently associated.

A1M has many affects on the immune system [5]: it inhibits stimulation of
cultured lymphocytes by protein antigens; it can induce cell division of
lymphocytes, a mitogenic effect that can either be enhanced or inhibited by
the action of other plasma components; it inhibits neutrophil granulocyte
migration in vitro; and it inhibits chemotaxis (cell migration against a
gradient of attractive agent). The recent identification of cell surface
receptors for A1M [5] may indicate the mechanism by which the protein
exerts its physiological effects.

A1MCGLOBULIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a motif for alpha-1-
microglobulin. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motif 1 includes a GxW triplet, which forms 
part of the first beta-strand (cf. the first motif of signature LIPOCALIN 
and PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213)); motif 5 lies in a conserved region
of the barrel involving beta-strands 6 and 7 and the loop between them, and
corresponds closely to the second motif of the lipocalin fingerprint; and
motif 6 encodes a similar region to the third lipocalin motif, which lies
in a structurally conserved region involving the final strand and part of 
the loop linking it to the C-terminal alpha-helix. Two iterations on 
SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 8 sequences was identified.
