CTLANTIGEN4
T cell-dependent immune processes require cell-surface interactions that
mediate the initiation, modulation and the ultimate course of the response.
The specificity of T cell recognition is determined by the engagement of the
T cell receptor (TCR) on T cells with cognate peptide-MHC complexes 
presented by antigen presenting cells (APCs). Additional signals are
required to sustain and enhance T cell activity, the most important of which
is provided by the engagement of CD28 on T cells with its ligands B7-1
(CD80) and B7-2 (CD86). By contrast, the interaction of B7 isoforms
with cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated molecule-4 CTLA-4, a CD28 homologue 
receptor on T cells (31% identity), provides inhibitory signals required
for down-regulation of the response, while it may also prevent T cell 
activation by weak TCR signals [1-5].

Unlike CD28, which is not expressed on resting T cells, CTLA-4 is not 
detected on the cell surface until 24 hours after activation. In fact, T
cell activation leads to both increased CTLA4 gene expression and
trafficking of CTLA4 protein to the cell surface. In addition, CTLA-4
exhibits an affinity for the B7 isoforms that is 10 to 100 times that for
CD28. Covalent dimerisation of CTLA4 is required for its high binding
avidity, but each monomeric subunit also contains a binding site for CD80
and CD86. On the basis of these differences in expression patterns and
affinities, it is likely that CTLA-4 directly competes with CD28 for binding
B7 and also directs the assembly of inhibitory signalling complexes that
lead to quiescence or anergy. Thus the balance between the opposing signals 
elicited by CD28 and CTLA-4 is central to the regulation of T cell
responsiveness and homeostasis. One mechanism by which CTLA-4 may perform
this function is by regulating cell-cycle progression; by contrast with 
CD28, which down-regulates the cell-cycle inhibitor p27kip1, CTLA-4 
prevents this degradation [2,3,5].

Sequence comparison between human CTLA-4 and CD28 proteins suggests they are
homologous, with the highest of degree of similarity being in the juxta-
membrane and cytoplasmic regions. In addition, the cytoplasmic domains
of human and murine CTLA-4 are identical, suggesting that this region has
important functional properties [1].
 
Typically, activation of T cells by TCR-engaging peptide-MHC is dramatically 
enhanced by interaction of the CD28 co-stimulatory receptor with its ligands 
CD80 (B7-1) and CD86 (B7-2) on the APC surface. Interestingly, CTLA-4 is 
transported from intracellular stores toward the region of the cell surface 
receiving activation signals. This suggests that binding of CD28 to its 
ligand may occur primarily at the centre of the mature immunological synapse, 
and that CTLA-4 may be transported to this site under certain circumstances 
to block or reverse this effect [6].

CTLANTIGEN4 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 2 spans the
first beta-strand; motif 3 encodes the third strand, which contains ligand-
binding residues; motif 4 encompasses strand 4; motif 5 spans strand 6,
which contains a glycosylation site; and motif 6 encodes strand 7. Two 
iterations on SPTR39_17f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 19 sequences was identified.
