MCEVIRFACTOR
Mycobacterial species are usually slender curved rods, with a unique cell 
wall of complex waxes and glycolipids. They are resistant to acids, alkalis
and dehydration, and are very slow to grow in vitro [1]. The human 
pathogenic Mycobacteria (M.tuberculosis and M.leprae) are becoming resistant 
to conventional treatments and, together with HIV-related diseases, are fast 
posing a global health threat [1]. An essential requirement, particularly of
M.tuberculosis, is to gain entrance to, and to resist, the hostile intra-
cellular environment of epithelial cells [1]. 

Recently, an operon was identified in the M.tuberculosis genome that encodes
cell entry (Mce) proteins, virulence factors required for invasion of host 
non-phagocytic cells [2]. Homologues of these genes have been found in other
Mycobacterial strains, and an Mce-deletion mutant in M.bovis greatly 
impaired the ability of the microbe to infect epithelial cells in vitro [2].
Although the exact function of Mce is unknown, it appears to serve as a 
surface effector molecule capable of eliciting plasma membrane perturbations
in non-phagocytic mammalian cells [2,3]. 

A more recent study into the effects of Mce proteins on T-cell activation
revealed that an epitope from these moieties, predicted by computational 
analyses and measured in the proliferative responses of CD4(+) cells, showed
good promise as a possible subunit vaccine [3]. With this protein also 
having similar homologues in other mycobacterial species [4], a novel 
vaccine or drug for the treatment of resistant mycobacterial infections 
looks likely [4].

MCEVIRFACTOR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Mycobacterial cell entry (MCE) protein family. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length. A single 
iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches were
found, O53542 and O53969, both mycobacterial hypothetical proteins that 
match motif 6 and either motif 1 or 3.  
