GHRELIN
Growth hormone (GH) is a pituitary hormone involved in cell and overall body
growth, carbohydrate-protein-lipid metabolism and osmotic homeostasis.
Control of GH release was initially ascribed to 2 pathways: stimulation by
hypothalamic GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) and inhibition by somatostatin.
More recently, synthetic compounds, termed GH secretagogues (GHS), were 
shown to stimulate GH release strongly. This effect is elicited by an orphan
G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), subsequently named the GHS receptor
(GHS-R). The endogenous ligand for this receptor was purified from rat and
human stomach and named ghrelin [1].

The purified cDNA for ghrelin encodes a 117 amino acid prepropeptide. The
first 23 amino acid residues form a signal peptide that is cleaved to leave
proghrelin. Residues 24-51 are cleaved to yield active ghrelin, discarding
the C-terminal fragment [2]. The 28-residue ghrelin peptide that is left is
biologically inactive. Esterification with n-octanoic acid at Ser3 is 
required for biological activity. Ghrelin mRNA is expressed mainly in the
stomach in a distinct endocrine cell type in the submucosal layer, known as
X/A-like cells. The active peptide is secreted into the bloodstream rather
than the stomach. Ghrelin responsive cells are found in abundance in a 
limited area of the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (ARC), a region involved in
control of food intake. As well as releasing GH indirectly via its action 
on the ARC region of the hypothalamus, ghrelin also appears to be able to
stimulate GH release via direct action on the pituitary [3].

A further variant of the ghrelin peptide exists in rat stomach, des-Gln14-
ghrelin. This is produced by alternative splicing and does not require the
esterification by n-octanoic acid for biological activity. However, its 
presence in only small quantities in the stomach suggests ghrelin is the
major active form. The ghrelin active peptide and the GHS receptor share
sequence similarity with motilin and the motilin receptor, respectively, 
suggesting an evolutionary relationship.

GHRELIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
preproghrelin peptides. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the C-termius
of the signal peptide and the N-terminus of the active peptide; motif 2
spans the C-terminal region of the active peptide; and motifs 3 and 4 span
the C-terminal region of the peptide that is discarded upon cleavage of
proghrelin. Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 11 sequences was identified.
