HISTAMINEH4R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Histamine is distributed within mast cells in all peripheral tissues and
is a well-characterised mediator of inflammation and allergy [6]. It also
regulates release of gastric acid from parietal cells in the gastric mucosa.
A fourth member of the histamine receptor family, HH4R, has been identified
that is expressed primarily in cells and tissues of the immune system, 
including: peripheral blood leukocytes, bone marrow, spleen and thymus 
[7,9-11]. This expression pattern suggests that the receptor may represent a
novel therapeutic target for the regulation of immune function, particularly
in allergy and asthma [9]. Binding of histamine to HH4R appears to result in
inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation through coupling to Gi
proteins [8,10]. The receptor has also been found to have a relatively high 
level of constitutive activity [10].

HISTAMINEH4R is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
histamine H4 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or N- and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
that characterise the H4 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of 
the histamine receptor family - motif 1 spans the first cytoplasmic loop;
motif 2 is located in the second external loop; motifs 3-5 lie in the third
cytoplasmic loop; and motif 6 lies at the C-terminus. Two iterations on 
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 6 sequences was identified.
