TNFACTORR19
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 19 (also known as toxicity and JNK inducer (TAJ) and TROY) is 
highly expressed during embryonic development, where it may act as a
regulator of cell activation and cell death [7]. In adult tissues, the
receptor is expressed in the central nervous system, and may mediate the
inhibitory effects of myelin upon axon regeneration [8].

TNFACTORR19 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 19. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in 
the N-terminal two thirds of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise TNF receptor 19 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motifs 1 and 2 lie within the extracellular N-terminal region,
and motifs 3 and 4 reside within the intracellular C-terminal region. Two
iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 11 sequences was identified. Three partial matches 
were also found, B4E2I6_HUMAN, Q8BWR1_MOUSE and Q2HJB7_BOVIN, which are
translated human, murine and bovine cDNA sequences that fail to match the
full complement of motifs.
