5HT3RECEPTOR
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) is widely distributed in both the
central and peripheral nervous system, where it acts as a neurotransmitter
and neuromodulator [1]. It has been implicated in several aspects of brain
function, including regulation of affective states, ingestive behavior and
addiction. 5-HT can activate a number of different receptor subtypes that
produce diverse neuronal responses, principally through activation of
G-protein-mediated signalling pathways. Signalling through the 5-HT3
receptor (5-HT3R) differs, since this subtype belongs to the ligand-gated
ion channel (LGIC) superfamily, which also includes the inhibitory
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A and glycine receptors, and excitatory
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) [2]. 5-HT3 receptor function has
been implicated in a variety of neural processes, including pain perception,
emesis, anxiety and drug abuse.

Like the other members of the LGIC superfamily, the 5HT3R exhibits a high
degree of sequence similarity, and therefore putative structural similarity,
with nAChRs [3]. Thus, funtional 5HT3Rs comprise a pentamer: the ion channel
is formed at the centre of a rosette formed between five homologous
subunits. Two classes of 5-HT3R subunit are currently known, termed 5-HT3A
and 5-HT3B. Whilst homomeric pentamers of 5-HT3A form functional receptors,
heteromeric assemblies display channel conductances, cation permeabilities
and current-voltage relationships typical of characterised neuronal 5-HT3 
channels [4].

The proposed topology of 5-HT3R subunits comprises four putative
transmembrane (TM) domains (designated M1-4); a large extracellular 
N-terminal region (~200 amino acids); and a variable cytoplasmic loop 
between M3 and M4. The M2 domains from each subunit are thought to form the 
channel pore [5]. The agonist binding site is formed by the N-terminus,
which, on binding, induces a conformational change in the channel pore, a
process often referred to as "gating" [5]. Opening of the pore allows cation
flux through the neuronal membrane and depolarises the membrane potential.
Thus, 5-HT3Rs may be thought of as excitatory receptors [6].

5HT3RECEPTOR is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
5-hydroxytryptamine type 3 receptor subunits. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the central portion of the alignment, focusing on
those sections that characterise the 5HT3Rs but distinguish them from other
members of the ligand-gated ion channel superfamily - motif 1 lies in the 
N-terminal domain; and motifs 3 and 4 reside within the variable cytoplasmic
loop between TM domains M3 and M4. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set. A single partial match was found, Q9UEP2, a putative 
truncated human 5-HT3A subunit lacking the N-terminus and TM domain M1.      
