FMOXYGENASE4
Flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) constitute a family of xenobiotic-
metabolising enzymes [1]. Using an NADPH cofactor and FAD prosthetic group,
these microsomal proteins catalyse the oxygenation of nucleophilic nitrogen,
sulphur, phosphorous and selenium atoms in a range of structurally diverse
compounds. FMOs have been implicated in the metabolism of a number of
pharmaceuticals, pesticides and toxicants. In man, lack of hepatic FMO-
catalysed trimethylamine metabolism results in trimethylaminuria (fish 
odour syndrome).

Five mammalian forms of FMO are now known and have been designated
FMO1-FMO5 [2-6]: this is a recent nomenclature based on comparison of
amino acid sequences, and has been introduced in an attempt to eliminate
confusion inherent in multiple, laboratory-specific designations and
tissue-based classifications [1]. Following the determination of the
complete nucleotide sequence of S.cerevisiae [7], a novel gene was found
to encode a protein with similarity to mammalian monooygenases.

FMO4 mRNA is present in low abundance in several foetal and adult tissues
and the corresponding gene thus appears to be expressed constitutively [8].
Sequence analysis reveals that FMO4 is 56% identical to FMO3; each is
encoded by a single gene [9]. The deduced amino acid sequence of human FM04 
includes the putative FAD- (GxGxxG) and NADP+ pyrophosphate-binding (GxGxxA)
sites characteristic of mammalian FMOs, a 'FATGY' motif that has also been
observed in a range of siderphore biosynthetic enzymes [10], and a C-terminal
hydrophobic segment that is believed to anchor the monooxygenase to the
microsomal membrane [11].

FMOXYGENASE4 is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type
4 flavin-containing monooxygenases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise type 4 FMOs but distinguish them from the rest
of the FMO family - motif 9 spans the C-terminal hydrophobic region thought
to act as a membrane anchor. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting
set. 
