FMOXYGENASE1
Flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) constitute a family of xenobiotic-
metabolising enzymes [1]. Using an NADPH cofactor and FAD prosthetic group,
these microsomal proteins catalyse the oxygenation of nucleophilic nitrogen,
sulphur, phosphorous and selenium atoms in a range of structurally diverse
compounds. FMOs have been implicated in the metabolism of a number of
pharmaceuticals, pesticides and toxicants. In man, lack of hepatic FMO-
catalysed trimethylamine metabolism results in trimethylaminuria (fish 
odour syndrome).

Five mammalian forms of FMO are now known and have been designated
FMO1-FMO5 [2-6]: this is a recent nomenclature based on comparison of
amino acid sequences, and has been introduced in an attempt to eliminate
confusion inherent in multiple, laboratory-specific designations and
tissue-based classifications [1]. Following the determination of the
complete nucleotide sequence of S.cerevisiae [7], a novel gene was found
to encode a protein with similarity to mammalian monooygenases.

Human FMO1 mRNA is more abundant in foetal than in adult liver, indicating 
that the enzyme is subject to developmental regulation in man [2]. Southern
blot hybridisation of human genomic DNA suggests that the protein is encoded 
by a single gene that maps to chromosome 1. The deduced amino sequence 
contains putative FAD- (GxGxxG) and NADP+-binding (GxGxxA) sites, a 'FATGY'
motif that has also been observed in a range of siderphore biosynthetic
enzymes [8], and a C-terminal hydrophobic segment that is believed to anchor
the monooxygenase to the microsomal membrane [9]. The human sequence shares 
88 and 86% identity, respectively, with pig and rabbit "hepatic" forms of
FMO, but is only 58% similar to the rabbit "pulmonary" FMO [2].

FMOXYGENASE1 is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type
1 flavin-containing monooxygenases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise type 1 FMOs but distinguish them from the rest
of the FMO family - motif 10 spans the C-terminal hydrophobic region thought
to act as a membrane anchor. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to 
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting
set. A single partial match was found, murine type 5 FMO (FMO5_MOUSE), which 
matches motifs 1 and 2.
