NEUROKININ3R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Neuropeptide receptors are present in very small quantities in the cell
and are embedded tightly in the plasma membrane. The neuropeptides exhibit
a high degree of functional diversity through both regulation of peptide
production and through peptide-receptor interaction [6]. The mammalian
tachykinin system consists of 3 distinct peptides: substance P, substance
K and neuromedin K. All possess a common spectrum of biological activities,
including sensory transmission in the nervous system and contraction/
relaxation of peripheral smooth muscles, and each interacts with a 
specific receptor type.

NK3 receptors are distributed widely throughout the rat CNS, and are found
in high levels in cerebral cortex, basal ganglia and dorsal horn of the
spinal chord. They have limited distribution in peripheral tissues, and
are found in ganglia (e.g., myenteric plexus), kidney, and in a limited 
number of smooth muscles (e.g., rat portal vein) [7]. NK3 receptors
activate the phosphoinositide pathway through a pertussis-toxin-insensitive 
G protein, probably of the Gq/G11 class [7].

NEUROKININ3R is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
neurokinin NK3 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections 
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the NK3 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the neurokinin family - motifs 1-3 reside within the N-terminus; motifs 4
and 5 span the second external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motif 6 lies
in the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 7 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 6
and the third external loop; and motifs 8 and 9 reside at the C-terminus.
Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point
at true set comprising 5 sequences was identified. Several partial matches 
were also found, all of which are homologues or fragments that fail to match
three or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences, and 1
partial match.
