NEUROMEDNU1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Neuromedin U is a neuropeptide, first isolated from porcine spinal cord and
expressed widely in the gastrointestinal, genitourinary and central nervous
systems [6,7]. Neuromedin U has potent contractile activity on smooth muscle
and this activity is believed to reside within the C-terminal portion of 
the peptide, which is highly conserved between species [6]. Other roles 
for the peptide include: regulation of blood flow and ion transport in
the intestine, regulation of adrenocortical function and increased blood
pressure [6,7]. The roles of neuromedin U in the central nervous system 
are poorly understood, but may include: regulation of food intake,
neuroendocrine control, modulation of dopamine actions and involvement in
neuropsychiatric disorders [6]. Two G protein-coupled receptor subtypes,
with differing expression patterns, have been identified and shown to bind
neuromedin U [6,7].

The neuromedin U type 1 receptor (NMU1) is expressed predominantly in the
periphery, with highest levels in the gastrointestinal and urogenital
systems, particularly in the testes [6]. The receptor is also found in the
kidney, pancreas, lung, trachea, adrenal cortex, liver and mammary glands
[6,7]. Within the small intestine and ileum, NMU1 is specifically expressed
in goblet cells [7]. In the central nervous system, the receptor is
expressed only at much lower levels and has been detected most abundantly
in the cerebellum, dorsal root ganglia, hippocampus and spinal cord [6].
Binding of neuromedin U to the receptor results in phospholipase C
activation and increased intracellular calcium concentrations through
coupling to Gq proteins [6].

NEUROMEDNU1R is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
neuromedin U type 1 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within N- and C-terminal and loop regions, focusing on those areas of the 
alignment that characterise type 1 neuromedin U receptors but distinguish 
them from the rest of the neuromedin U receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 
reside at the N-terminus; motif 3 spans the second cytoplasmic loop, leading
into TM domain 4; motif 4 lies in the second external loop; motifs 5 and 6
reside in the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs 7-9 span the C-terminus. A 
single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to reach convergence, no
further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
