CTRFAMILY
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that   
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-   
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the   
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct   
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,   
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in   
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like   
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating   
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.       

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid   
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-   
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM'
signature.      

The major physiological role of calcitonin is to inhibit bone resorption
thereby leading to a reduction in plasma Ca++ [6]. Further, it enhances 
excretion of ions in the kidney, prevents absorption of ions in the 
intestine, and inhibits secretion in endocrine cells (e.g. pancreas and
pituitary). In the CNS, calcitonin has been reported to be analgesic
and to suppress feeding and gastric acid secretion. It is used to treat
Paget's disease of the bone. Calcitonin receptors are found predominantly
on osteoclasts or on immortal cell lines derived from these cells. It is
found in lower amounts in the brain (e.g. in hypothalamus and pituitary
tissues) and in peripheral tissues (e.g. testes, kidney, liver and
lymphocytes). It has also been described in lung and breast cancer cell
lines. The predominant signalling pathway is activation of adenylyl cyclase
through Gs, but calcitonin has also been described to have both stimulatory
and inhibitory actions on the phosphoinositide pathway.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a neuropeptide with diverse
biological effects including potent vasodilator activity [8]. Messenger RNA
for this receptor is predominantly expressed in the lung and heart, with
specific localisation to lung alveolar cells and cardiac myocytes [8]. In 
the rat lung, it is associated with blood vessels; the gene may therefore
play an important role in the maintenance of vascular tone [9]. mRNA is also
found in the cerebellum [10]. The ligand for this receptor-like protein 
remains to be discovered. 

CTRFAMILY is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
calcitonin receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the calcitonin receptor family but distinguish it from the
rest of the secretin-like GPCR superfamily - motifs 1-5 span the N-terminal
putative extracellular domain, motif 5 leading into the first TM domain; 
motif 6 spans the C-terminus of putative TM domain 4; motif 7 includes the
N-terminus of TM domain 7; and motifs 8 and 9 reside at the C-terminus. Two
iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified.
