FLGHOOKFLIE
Four genes from the major B.subtilis chemotaxis locus have been shown to
encode proteins that are similar to the S.typhimurium FlgB, FlgC, FlgG and 
FliF proteins; a further gene product is similar to the E.coli FliE protein
[1]. All of these proteins are thought to form part of the hook-basal body
complex of the bacterial flagella [1]. The FlgB, FlgC and FlgG proteins are
components of the proximal and distal rods; FliF forms the M-ring that
anchors the rod assembly to the membrane; but the role of FliE has not yet
been determined [1]. The similarity between the proteins in these two 
organisms suggests that the structures of the M-ring and the rod may be
similar [1]. Nevertheless, some differences in size and amino acid 
composition between some of the homologues suggest the basal body proteins
may be organised slightly differently within B.subtilis [1]. 

From gel electrophoresis and autoradiography of 35S-labelled S.typhimurium
hook-basal body complexes and the deduced number of sulphur-containing
residues in FliE, the stoichiometry of the protein in the hook-basal body
complex has been estimated to be about nine subunits [2]. FliE does not 
undergo cleavage of a signal peptide, nor does it show any similarity to
the axial components like the rod or hook proteins, which are thought to be
exported by the flagellum-specific export pathway [2]. On this evidence, 
it has been suggested that FliE may be in the vicinity of the MS ring,
perhaps acting as an adaptor protein between ring and rod substructures [2].

FLGHOOKFLIE is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a fingerprint for
flagellar hook protein FliE. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length. Two iterations on
OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 6 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also 
found, both of which fail to make a significant match with one motif:
RSFLIEGEN is a FliE protein from Rhodobacter sphaeroides; and E64714 
is a flagellar basal-body protein from Helicobacter pylori.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 8 sequences.
