MTG16PROTEIN
Transcriptional activation and repression is required for control of
cell proliferation and differentiation during embryonic development and
homeostasis in the adult organism. Perturbations of these processes can
lead to the development of cancer [1]. The Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) gene
product is able to form complexes with corepressors and deacetylases,
such as nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR), which repress transcription
when recruited by transcription factors [2].

The ETO gene derives its name from its association with many cases of
acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML), in which a reciprocal translocation,
t(8;21), brings together a large portion of the ETO gene from chromosome
eight and part of the AML1 gene from chromosome 21. The human ETO gene
family currently comprises three major subfamilies: ETO/myeloid
transforming gene on chromosome 8 (MTG8); myeloid transforming gene related
protein-1 (MTGR1) and myeloid transforming gene on chromosome 16 (MTG16).

ETO proteins are composed of four evolutionarily conserved domains termed
nervy homology regions (NHR) 1-4. NHR1 is thought to stabilise the formation
of high molecular weight complexes, but is not directly responsible for
repressor activity. NHR2 and its flanking sequence comprise the core
repressor domain, which mediates 50% of the wild type repressor activity.
Furthermore, there is evidence that the amphipathic helical structure of
NHR2 promotes the formation of ETO/AML1 homodimers [1]. NHR3 and NHR4 have
been shown to act in concert to bind N-CoR. NHR4 contains two zinc finger
motifs, which are thought to play a role in protein interactions rather
than DNA binding [2].

The t(16;21) translocation is associated with therapy-related myeloid
malignancies and is a variant of t(8;21) described above. cDNA clones were
obtained by RTPCR using AML1-specific primers, and revealed that AML1 was
fused to a novel gene showing significant similarity to ETO. The gene was
subsequently named MTG16 for myeloid transforming gene on chromosome 16 [3].

MTG16PROTEIN is 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
myeloid transforming gene on chromosome 16 (MTG16) protein. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise MTG16 proteins but distinguish them from
closely related ETO family members - motif 1 resides within NHR3; and motifs
2 and 3 lie between NHR4 and the C-terminus. A single iteration on 
SPTR40_22f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being 
identified beyond the starting set.
