INTRLEUKN1R2
Interleukin-1 alpha and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 alpha and IL-1 beta) are 
cytokines that participate in the regulation of immune responses, 
inflammatory reactions, and hematopoiesis [1]. Two types of IL-1 receptor,
each with three extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains, limited 
sequence similarity (28%) and different pharmacological characteristics 
have been cloned from mouse and human cell lines: these have been termed
type I and type II receptors [2]. The receptors both exist in transmembrane 
(TM) and soluble forms: the soluble IL-1 receptor is thought to be post-
translationally derived from cleavage of the extracellular portion of the
membrane receptors [2].

The mature type II IL-1 receptor consists of (i) a ligand binding portion 
comprising three Ig-like domains; (ii) a single TM domain; and (iii) a short
cytoplasmic domain of 29 amino acids [3]. This contrasts with the ~215 amino
acid cytoplasmic domain of the type I receptor, suggesting that the two 
IL-1 receptors may interact with different signal transduction pathways [3].
The type II receptor is expressed in a number of different tissues,
including both B and T lymphocytes, and can be induced in several cell types
by treatment with phorbol ester [3]. Both IL-1 receptors appear to be well
conserved in evolution, and map to the same chromosomal location [3]. Like 
the type I receptor, the human type II IL-1 receptor can bind all three
forms of IL-1 (IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta and IL-1RA) [3].

INTRLEUKN1R2 is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
interleukin-1 receptor type II precursor. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing 
on those sections that characterise the interleukin-1 receptor type II 
precursor but distinguish it from other members of the interleukin-1 
receptor family - motif 1 lies in Ig-like C2-type domain 1; motifs 3 and 4
reside within Ig-like C2-type domain 2; motifs 6 and 7 span Ig-like C2-type
domain 3; and motifs 9 and 10 span the putative TM domain. Two iterations 
on SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 6 sequences was identified.
