KCNABCHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].

Some types of K+ channel are closed at the resting potential of the cell,
but open on membrane depolarisation, and are thus known as voltage-gated 
channels. Each of these types of channel typically comprises 4 pore-forming
alpha subunits that may associate with one of a number of different types of
beta subunit. Two types of beta subunit (KCNE and KCNAB) are presently known
to associate with voltage-gated alpha subunits (Kv, KCNQ and eag-like).
However, not all combinations of alpha and beta subunits are possible.

The KCNAB family of K+ channel beta subunits form tetramers arranged in
a similar manner to the pore forming alpha subunits. KCNAB subunits are
oxidoreductase enzymes, complete with nicotinamide (NADPH)-cofactors in 
their active sites. Changes in the oxidoreductase activity appear to 
markedly influence the gating mode of Kv channels, since mutations to the
catalytic residues in the active site lessen the inactivating activity of
KCNAB [2]. The KCNAB family is further divided into 3 subfamilies: KCNAB1
(Kvbeta3), KCNAB2 (Kvbeta2) and KCNAB3.

KCNABCHANNEL is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
KCNAB voltage-gated K+ channel beta subunit family. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment. Two
iterations on SPTR39.22_17.3f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 16 sequences was identified.
