LNOTCHREPEAT
LIN-12/notch proteins function as receptors for intercellular signals during
development in a diverse range of species, from human through to C.elegans.
The LIN-12/notch family is characterised by a repeat region (termed LNR),
and members also share a number of other features, such as extracellular EGF 
repeats and intracellular ankyrin repeats. Notch is involved in many
developmental processes, including limb and appendage development, lymphoid
lineage selection, axon pathfinding and dendritic sprouting. Dysfunction of
the notch/LIN-12 signalling pathway has been implicated in several human
diseases, including leukaemia, cervical and colon cancer, Alzheimer's
disease, cerebral ischaemia and alagille syndrome [1].  

The notch protein can be divided into 3 main regions: a large extracellular
domain (ECD), which is composed largely of EGF repeats (between 10 and 36)
and also contains the triplet cysteine-rich LIN-12/Notch repeat; a single
transmembrane (TM) domain; and an intracellular domain (ICD), which contains
6 ankyrin repeats that form the binding site for cytoplasmic regulators of
notch activity [2]. Three components appear to be essential for LIN-12/notch
signalling: the Delta/Serrate/LAG-2 (DSL) ligand; the LIN-12/notch receptor
itself; and the CBF1/Su(H)/LAG-1 (CSL) transcription factor. While 2 EGF-
like repeats (11 and 12 in Drosophila) appear to be sufficient and necessary
for DSL ligand binding, the LNR region appears to be involved in receptor
regulation. Currently, 2 possible methods of CSL factor regulation are
proposed: receptor-mediated transport of the CSL factor from cytoplasm
to nucleus; and cleavage of the ICD upon receptor activation, followed by
entry of the ICD into the nucleus, where it acts as a co-activator of
transcription with the CSL factor [3].

LNOTCHREPEAT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
LIN-12/notch (LNR) repeat. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions within the 
repeat, successively encoding the C-termini of repeats 1, 2 and 3 
respectively. Two iterations on SPTR39_14f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 23 sequences was identified.
