MHCIIACTVATR
Class II transactivator (CIITA) determines the level, cell type specificity,
inducibility and extinction of MHC-II expression. CIITA is also the 
obligatory mediator of INF-gamma inducible MHC-II expression. Thus control
of MHC-II expression is ultimately dependent on the control of expression
of the CIITA gene itself. Defective CIITA has been shown to be responsible
for one class of base lymphocyte syndrome (BLS). BLS is an often fatal 
genetic defect, characterised by severe immunodeficiency as a result of 
failure to express MHC class II genes. Expression of CIITA is controlled by
four independent CIITA promoters, leading to CIITA transcripts with four 
distinct first exons. The individual promoters are used in an alternative
and tissue-specific manner. CIITA promoter (CIITA-P)I is the promoter used
in dentritic cells; CIITA-PII is expressed at insignificant levels and is 
as yet functionally poorly understood; CIITA-PIII is constitutively
expressed in B lymphocytes and can drive CIITA expression after INF-gamma
stimulation in a number of different cell types, including endothelial cells
and fibroblasts; and CIITA-PIV is the principal INF-gamma-inducible promoter.
The cellular and temporal diversity in MHC class II expression is thus 
regulated via the different usage of the CIITA promoters [1-3,6-8].

Transcription of the MHC class II and related genes is regulated by a common
set of transcription factors. These include REX, X2BP/CREB, NF-Y and CIITA,
which all bind a short-150bp regulatory module conserved in the promoter 
proximal regions of all MHC-II genes. This regulatory module consists of 
four cis-acting sequences and is known as the W-X-X2-Y region. Binding of
REX, X2BP and NF-Y to the promoter DNA is highly cooperative and results in
the formation of a remarkably stable higher-order nucleoprotein complex that
can be regarded as the MHC-II enhanceosome. However, the above three factors
are expressed ubiquitously and in an apparently unregulated manner, implying
that they do not provide the regulatory function necessary for cell-specific
and inducible MHCII expression. It follows that enhanceosome assembly is
essential but not sufficient for MHC-II expression, which ultimately depends
on CIITA, a highly regulated master control factor that is recruited to the
enhanceosome by multiple weak interactions between its C-terminal moiety and
several different components of the MHC-II enhanceosome [1-3]. 

CIITA contains four domains: acidic (A), proline-serine-threonine-rich (PST), 
GTP-binding (GBD), and leucine-rich repeat (LRR). All of these are required
to activate the MHC class II promoter. The acidic transcriptional activation
domain interacts with TAFII32. Recruitment of the coactivator protein CBP by
the acidic domain has also been shown to lead to synergistic activation of
MHC class II promoters and the repression of the interleukin-4 promoter. The
PST domain is essential for CIITA function, but its exact role remains 
unknown. The central region containing the GTP-binding and LXXLL motifs 
plays an important role in CIITA self-association. This region interacts 
with itself, the N-terminal domain of CIITA (A/PST) and C-terminal LRR. In 
addition to their role in CIITA self-association, which is generally 
necessary for the association of the protein with the import machinery, both
GBD (where GTP binding is believed to cause a conformational change  
compatible with nuclear translocation) and LRR domains have been shown to
play important roles in the nuclear localisation of CIITA. Generally, 
translocation of a protein from the cytoplasm into the nucleus is dependent
on the presence of nuclear localisation signals (NLSs) within the protein. 
NLSs tend to be rich in basic residues that mediate binding to members of 
the importin alpha family of proteins. In human CIITA, the 110-residue 
region from 336-444 appears to contain a NLS. Export of a protein depends 
on the presence of a specific export signal (NES). NESs are short leucine-
rich motifs - in CIITA, they have the consensus LXXXLXXLXL, and are
localised in the N- and C-terminal regions [4,5,7].

Numerous in vitro and functional studies have implicated CIITA in multiple
steps of the transcriptional activation process: e.g., (i) it may facilitate
chromatin remodelling, as it interacts with histone acetyltransferases;
moreover, it has intrinsic acetyltransferase activity; (ii) it interacts
with the general transcription factors TFIIB, HTAFII32 and HTAFI70, implying
that it may recruit the transcriptional apparatus directly; (iii) it
interacts with TFIIH and P-TEFb, and may therefore enhance promoter
clearance and transcription elongation. An implicit picture emerging from
these studies is that CIITA activates transcription single-handedly, while
the role of the MHCII enhanceosome is relegated to specific DNA sequence
recognition and CIITA recruitment [9].

MHCIIACTVATR is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
CIITA transcriptional coactivators. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motifs 1-4 and 5-7
span the two nuclear export regions, motifs 1,6 and 9 containing the NES 
consensus, LXXXLXXLXL. Two iterations on SPTR39_17f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was 
identified. A single partial match was also found, Q29704, the human RJ2.2.5 
mutant, a non-functional CIITA that matches motifs 1-4, the first of the 
two nuclear export regions.
