CLAUDIN
Tight junctions (TJs) are specialised membrane domains found at the
most apical region of polarised epithelial and endothelial cells. They
create a primary barrier, preventing paracellular transport of solutes and 
restricting lateral diffusion of membrane lipids and proteins. They also
act as diffusion barriers within plasma membranes, creating and maintaining 
apical and basolateral membrane domains.

Recently, the molecular architecture of tight junctions has begun to be
elucidated. One group of proteins thought to be major components of TJs is
the claudin family [1]. Immunofluorescence studies have shown that claudins
are targeted to and incorporated into tight junctions [2]. Furthermore,
when claudins are introduced into cells that lack tight junctions, networks
of strands and grooves form at cell-cell contact sites that closely
resemble native TJs [3].

The claudin protein family is encoded by at least 18 human genes, with
many homologues cloned from other species. Tissue distribution patterns for
the claudin family members are distinct [4]: claudin 11, for example, is
found predominantly in the CNS; and claudin 16 mRNA is expressed in the
kidney. Defects in claudin genes therefore give rise to diseases in a
tissue-specific manner: alterations in claudin 11 have been implicated in
multiple sclerosis; and mutations in the claudin 16 gene affect the
re-uptake of magnesium ions in the kidney, leading to renal failure [5].

The claudins are believed to share a common topology, comprising four
membrane-spanning helices (TM1 to 4) with the N- and C-termini located in
the cytoplasm. The first extracellular loop is longer and more hydrophobic
than the second, and is believed to bridge the extracellular space. Among
claudins, the greatest level of sequence conservation is observed in TM1
and 4, as well as the extracellular loops. The sequences of TM2, TM3 and,
in particular, the C-terminus display the greatest level of diversity in
primary structure. Many claudin family members feature a -Y-V motif at the
C-terminus; this sequence interacts with the PDZ domain, a module of 80-90
residues found in other tight junction-associated membrane proteins, such
as ZO-1 [4].

CLAUDIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
claudin family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 62 proteins: motifs were drawn from the central portion of the alignment,
focusing on those sections that characterise the claudins but distinguish 
them from closely related proteins, such as calcium channel gamma subunits -
the motifs span the first, second and fourth putative TM domains,
respectively. Three iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 71 sequences was identified.
A single partial match was also found, Q8VC62, a hypothetical mouse protein 
that matches motifs 1 and 2.
