MELATONIN1XR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Melatonin is secreted by the pineal gland during darkness [6]. It regulates
a variety of neuroendocrine functions and is thought to play an essential
role in circadian rhythms [6]. Drugs that modify the action of melatonin,
and hence influence circadian cycles, are of clinical interest (for example,
in the treatment of jet-lag) [6]. Melatonin receptors are found in the 
retina, in the pars tuberalis of the pituitary, and in discrete areas of 
the brain. The receptor inhibits adenylyl cyclase via a pertussis-toxin-
sensitive G protein, probably of the Gi/Go class [6]. 

Three sub-types have been cloned, designated Mel1a, Mel1b and Mel1c,
together with a closely related orphan receptor, termed Mel1x. Mel1x from 
human pituitary is a protein of 613 amino acids that is 45% identical to
human Mel1a and Mel1b receptors [7]. Although closely related to the 
melatonin receptor family, the sequence is unusual in lacking N-linked
glycosylation sites and in bearing a >300 residue C-terminal tail. The
receptor does not bind [125I]melatonin or [3H]melatonin [7]. Its mRNA is 
expressed in hypothalamus and pituitary, suggesting that the receptor and 
its natural ligand are involved in neuroendocrine function [7]. 

MELATONIN1XR is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
melatonin-related 1X receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the melatonin-related 1X receptors but distinguish them 
from the melatonin receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 span the N-terminus,
leading into TM domain 1; motif 3 lies in the first external loop; motif 4
lies in the second external loop; motif 5 resides in the third cytoplasmic
loop; and motifs 6-12 span the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f 
was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified 
beyond the starting set. 
