LYMPHOTACTNR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Chemokines are proteins that have important physiological and patho-
physiological roles in a wide range of acute and chronic inflammatory
processes [6]. Their sequences are similar and are characterised by a
4-cysteine motif: the family can be divided according to whether the first 2
Cys residues are adjacent (the C-C family), or separated by an intervening
residue (the C-x-C family).

Two additional chemokine families have also been identified, each containing
only one member. C chemokines have only one of the first two Cys residues,
while C-x3-C chemokines contain both cysteines, separated by three
intervening residues [8]. Lymphotactin is the only known member of the C
chemokine family. It has closest similarity to the C-C chemokines but
contains only the second and fourth of the conserved cysteine residues. The
chemokine is produced by certain subsets of T cells and natural killer cells
and is also chemotactic for these cell types [7,8].

An orphan receptor (GPR5) has been identified as a receptor for lymphotactin
and has been renamed XCR1 [8]. XCR1 is strongly expressed in placenta and at
lower levels in the spleen and thymus. It is detected only at very low
levels in peripheral blood leukocytes [8]. Within these tissues, expression
of XCR1 appears to be restricted to CD8+ T cells and natural killer cells
[9]. Binding of lymphotactin to XCR1 stimulates calcium mobilisation and
migration in a pertussis toxin-sensitive manner, indicating coupling of the
receptor to Gi type proteins [8]. The matching expression patterns of both
lymphotactin and its receptor suggest a role for the chemokine in self- 
recruitment of leukocytes [9].

LYMPHOTACTNR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
lymphotactin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the lymphotactin receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the chemokine receptor family - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus, 
leading into TM domain 1; motif 2 encodes the first cytoplasmic loop, 
leading into TM domain 2; motif 3 spans the N-terminal portion of TM domain
3; motif 4 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 5 lies at the C-terminus
of TM domain 4, leading into the second external loop; motif 6 resides in 
the second external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motif 7 encodes the 
third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 8 is located at the C-terminus. A single
iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
