ANNEXINVII
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster, Xenopus
laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and Neurospora
crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from those found in
other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium binding sites are found within
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity,
exocytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the
extracellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA
replication [2].

The annexin VII subtype (ANX7) is the most evolutionarily conserved member 
of this gene family. It encodes a calcium-activated GTPase that plays a 
role in membrane fusion, and localises to secretory vesicles and plasma 
membranes. Genetic studies have revealed the ANX7 gene to be an attractive 
candidate tumour suppressor gene in prostate cancer [5].

ANNEXINVII is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
type VII annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions that 
characterise annexin VII polypeptides but distinguish them from other 
closely related annexin subtypes - motifs 1-3 lie within the repeat-rich 
region at the N-terminus; motif 4 resides between the repeat-rich region and
the first annexin repeat; motif 5 lies in the second repeat; and motifs 6 
and 7 are located in the third repeat. Two iterations on SPTR41_24f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 7 
sequences was identified. 
