VIP1RECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that   
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-   
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the   
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct   
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,   
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in   
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like   
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating   
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.       

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid   
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-   
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM'
signature.      

Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) has a wide physiological profile.
In the periphery, it induces relaxation in smooth muscle; inhibits
secretion in certain tissues, but stimulates secretion in others; and
modulates activity of cells in the immune system [6]. In the CNS, it has a
range of both excitatory and inhibitory actions. VIP receptors are
distributed widely in the periphery, and occur throughout the gastro-
intestinal tract and genitourinary system, other smooth muscles and
secretory glands. In the CNS, they are found abundantly in, e.g. the cortex,
hippocampus and thalamus [6]. All VIP receptors activate adenylyl cyclase.

There are two structurally distinct receptors that recognise VIP peptides
and pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) with similar
affinities (PACAP/VIPR-1, PACAP/VIPR-2), as well as a specific receptor for
the PACAP peptide (PACAP-1). RNA transcripts for all three receptor types
are found in human heart, brain and adipose tissue [7]. VIPR-1 is 
constitutively expressed, while the expression of VIPR-2 is induced only
following stimulation through the TCR-associated CD3 complex [8]. VIP
induces the expression of the VIPR-2 gene in the absence of additional
stimuli. Differential expression and regulation of the two VIP receptors 
in T lymphocytes suggests different physiological roles in mediating the
immunomodulatory activities of VIP and related neuropeptides [8]. 

VIP1RECEPTOR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
vasoactive intestinal peptide type 1 receptors. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those
areas that characterise the type 1 VIP receptors but distinguish them from
the rest of the VIP receptor family - motifs 1-3 lie in the N-terminal 
region immediately preceding TM domain 1; motif 4 spans the loop between
TM domains 2 and 3; motif 5 resides in the loop between TM domains 3 and 4;
motif 6 spans the loop between TM domains 6 and 7; and motifs 7 and 8 reside
at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
A single partial match was found, VIPR_CARAU, a goldfish type 1 VIP receptor
that matches motifs 4, 5, 7 and 8.
