SURFACELAYER
Lactobacillus species form a major part of the normal human digestive and
genital tract microflora, up to as much as 70% [1]. Commensal bacterial 
colonisation of, and adhesion to, the intestinal tract is essential in the 
establishment of a stable microflora and, if missing, allows virulent 
species to attack the mucosal surfaces [1]. Little is known of how the 
bacterium manages to colonise and adhere to the intestinal tract, in stark
contrast to the knowledge accrued of how pathogens adhere to the gut.

A common feature of prokaryotic cell walls formed outside the plasma 
membrane is the presence of ordered, planar arrays of polypeptide subunits, 
dubbed surface or S-layers [2]. They perform many roles, depending on the 
bacterial species (cell recognition, virulence factors and protective coats, 
to name but a few). In Lactobacillus species, S-layer proteins enable the
microbes to adhere to and colonise the intestinal tract [2]. A number of
homologues of the gene originally described in L.crispatus have been found 
in other Lactobacilli [3]. Their sequence similarity has allowed a test to
be developed that distinguishes between strains of L.helveticus [3].

Recently, a novel technique that uses flagellum display was able to 
characterise the exact functional domains of the Lactobacillus SlpA
S-layer protein [4]. An 81-amino acid region in the N-terminal region of the 
protein binds host fibronectin, allowing the bacteria to adhere to host
epithelial cells [4].

SURFACELAYER is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Lactobacillus surface layer protein family. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment (~370 amino acids).
Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified. Two partial matches
were also found, Q9L5V6 and Q9S4K2, both Lactobacillus cell-surface proteins
that match motifs 7 and 8.
