MHCCLASSI
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) superfamily molecules are hetero-
dimeric cell surface receptors that function to present antigen peptide
fragments to T cells responsible for cell-mediated immune responses. MHC
molecules can be subdivided into two groups on the basis of structure and
function: class I molecules present intracellular antigen peptide fragments 
(~10 amino acids) on the surface of the host cells to cytotoxic T cells; 
class II molecules present exogenously derived antigenic peptides (~15 amino
acids) to helper T cells. MHC class I and II molecules are assembled and
loaded with their peptide ligands via different mechanisms. However, both
present T cells with antigen peptides for recognition and subsequent host
cell degradation.

Class I molecules are expressed on the surface of all somatic nucleated
cells, with the exception of neurons. Cytotoxic T cell receptors (TCR) are
able to recognise peptides, but only when they are complexed with MHC I
molecules on the surface of the host cell. Antigen peptide fragments are
generated within the cytosol of the host cell by the proteosome. These
peptides are then translocated from the cytoplasm to the rough endoplasmic
reticulum (RER) by the transporter of antigenic peptide (TAP) protein.
Inside the RER, some of these peptides bind to the MHC class I protein,
resulting in a change in conformation [1]. This allows for the association 
of beta-2 microglobulin, without which the MHC molecule would destabilise
and not be expressed on the cell surface.

MHC class I molecules comprise two chains [2]: the alpha chain consists
of three extracellular domains (alpha 1-3, alpha-1 being closest to the 
N-terminus and alpha-3 closest to the membrane), a  transmembrane region 
and a C-terminal cytoplasmic tail; the soluble extracellular beta-2
microglobulin chain associates primarily with the alpha-3 domain and is
necessary for MHC stability. A deep groove exists between the alpha-1 and
alpha-2 domains, which binds peptides in order to display them to the TCR.

The crystal structure of human major histocompatibility complex class I B
allele HLA B*3501 complexed with the 8-mer peptide epitope HIV1 Nef 75-82 
(VPLRPMTY) has been determined to 2.0A resolution [3]. The structure 
exhibits a novel conformation of the peptide within the binding groove [3].
Comparison with crystal structures of closely related alleles reveals
significant differences at both N- and C-termini, indicating a strong 
interdependence between the HLA class I molecule and the bound peptide [4].

MHCCLASSI is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the MHC
class I alpha chain. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 17 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
N-terminal half of the alignment - motif 1, which lies in the extracellular
alpha-1 domain, encodes alpha-helix 2; and motifs 2-4, which span the 
extracellular alpha-2 domain, encode beta-strand 5, strand 6, and the 
C-terminus of helix 4 and helix 5, respectively. Seven iterations on 
SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 671 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are MHC class I and related proteins (including splice 
variants) that fail to make significant matches with one or more motifs.
