WNT10PROTEIN
Wnt proteins constitute a large family of secreted molecules that are
involved in intercellular signalling during development. The name derives
from the first 2 members of the family to be discovered: int-1 (mouse) and
wingless (Drosophila) [1]. It is now recognised that Wnt signalling controls
many cell fate decisions in a variety of different organisms, including
mammals [2]. Wnt signalling has been implicated in tumorigenesis, early
mesodermal patterning of the embryo, morphogenesis of the brain and kidney,
regulation of mammary gland proliferation, and Alzheimer's disease [3,4].

Wnt-mediated signalling is believed to proceed initially through binding to
cell surface receptors of the frizzled family; the signal is subsequently
transduced through several cytoplasmic components to B-catenin, which enters
the nucleus and activates the transcription of several genes important in
development [5]. More recently, however, several non-canonical Wnt
signalling pathways have been elucidated that act independently of
B-catenin [6]. Members of the Wnt gene family are defined by their sequence
similarity to mouse Wnt-1 and Wingless in Drosophila. They encode proteins
of ~350-400 residues in length, with orthologues identified in several,
mostly vertebrate, species. Very little is known about the structure of 
Wnts as they are notoriously insoluble; in terms of primary structure, the
family is characterised by a signal sequence and an almost invariant pattern
of 23-24 conserved cysteines [1]. Fifteen major Wnt gene families have been 
identified in vertebrates, with multiple subtypes within some classes.

Two subtypes of the Wnt-10 protein exist, designated Wnt-10a and Wnt-10b. In
mouse, these proteins share 62% sequence identity, compared to 59% in human 
[7,8]. Their expression pattern indicates that they function in tissues 
responsible for the formation and maturation of red blood cells.

WNT10PROTEIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Wnt-10 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise Wnt-10 
proteins but distinguish them from other Wnt subtypes - motifs 1-5 reside in 
the conserved domain between the highly conserved cysteines. Two iterations 
on SPTR40_22f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 6 sequences was identified. A single partial match was also 
found, P79753, Wnt10b from Fugu rubripes that matches motifs 1, 2 and 5.
