CYSLT1RECPTR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of which
transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the receptors
are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural framework
comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Leukotrienes (LT) are potent lipid mediators derived from arachidonic acid
metabolism. They can be divided into two classes based on the presence or
absence of a cysteinyl group. Leukotriene B4 (LTB4) does not contain such a
group, whereas LTC4, LTD4, LTE4 and LTF4 are cysteinyl leukotrienes [6].

Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs), previously known as the "slow reacting
substance of anaphylaxis", are produced predominantly by myeloid cells
associated with inflammatory responses [9]. They are the most potent
bronchoconstrictors known and also have pro-inflammatory effects, making
them important mediators in the pathophysiology of human asthma [8]. CysLTs
have also been implicated in a variety of other diseases, such as allergic
rhinitis, inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis [9]. Pharmacological
studies of the effects of CysLTs have provided evidence for the existence of
at least 2 distinct receptor subtypes, belonging to the G protein-coupled
receptor family, designated CysLT1 and CysLT2 [7,8]. CysLT1 is thought to
mediate bronchospasm, plasma exudation, vasoconstriction, mucus secretion
and eosinophil recruitment [8]. CysLT2 is less well defined, owing to a lack
of specific agonists and antagonists, but is thought to mediate some of the
vascular effects attributed to CysLTs [8,9]. Both receptor subtypes have now
been cloned [7,10].

CysLT1 has a much higher affinity for LTD4 than for the other cysteinyl
leukotrienes and, upon activation, stimulates phosphatidyl inositol
hydrolysis and increases in intracellular calcium. The receptor is expressed
at highest levels in the spleen and in peripheral blood leukocytes, with 
lower levels in the lung, placenta, small intestine, pancreas, colon and 
heart [7,8,11].

CYSLT1RECPTR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within loop, TM and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of
the alignment that characterise cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 but
distinguish it from the rest of the cysteinyl leukotriene receptor family -
motif 1 encodes the C-terminal portion of TM domain 4, leading into the
second external loop; motif 2 lies at the N-terminus of TM domain 5; motif 3
is located in the third cytoplasmic loop; motifs 4 and 5 span the third
external loop; and motif 6 resides at the C-terminus. A single iteration on
SPTR40_22f was required to reach convergence, no further sequence being
identified beyond the starting set.
