AIREGULATOR
AIRE (AutoImmune REgulator) is the predicted protein responsible for a rare 
autosomal recessively inherited disease termed APECED. APECED, also 
called Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome type I (APS 1), is the only 
described autoimmune disease with established monogenic background, being 
localised outside the major histocompatibility complex region. It is 
characterised by the presence of two of the three major clinical entities, 
chronic mucocutaneus candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism and Addison's disease. 
Other immunologically mediated phenotypes, including insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus (IDDM), gonadal failure, chronic gastritis, vitiligo, 
autoimmune thyroid disease, enamel hypoplasia, and alopecia may also 
be present. Immunologically, APECED patients have deficient T cell 
responses towards Candida antigens, and clinical symptoms both within and 
outside the endocrine system, mainly as a result of autoimmunity against 
organ-specific autoantigens [1,2].

AIRE has motifs suggestive of a transcriptional regulator protein. It 
harbours two zinc fingers of the plant homodomain (PHD) type. A putative DNA-
binding domain, termed SAND, as well as four nuclear receptor binding LXXLL 
motifs, an inverted LXXLL domain, and a variant of the latter (FXXLL), hint 
that this protein functions as a transcription coactivator. Furthermore, a 
highly conserved N-terminal 100-amino acid domain in AIRE shows significant
similarity to the homogeneously staining (HSR) domain of Sp100 and Sp140 
proteins, which has been shown to function as a dimerisation domain in
several Sp-100 related proteins [2-4].

AIRE has a dual subcellular location. It is not only expressed in multiple 
immunologically relevant tissues, such as the thymus, spleen, lymph nodes 
and bone marrow, but it has also been detected in various other tissues, 
such as kidney, testis, adrenal glands, liver and ovary, suggesting that  
APECED proteins might also have a function outside the immune system. 
However, AIRE is not expressed in the target organs of autoimmune
destruction. At the subcellular level, AIRE can be found in the cell nucleus 
in a speckled pattern in domains resembling promyeolocytic leukaemia nuclear 
bodies, also known as ND10, nuclear dots or potential oncogenic domains 
associated with the AIRE homologous nuclear proteins Sp100, Sp140, and Lysp100.  
The nuclear localisation of AIRE, in keeping with its predicted protein 
domains, suggest that it may regulate the mechanisms involved in the
induction and maintenance of immune tolerance [3,4].

AIREGULATOR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
AIRE autoimmune regulators. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
largely spanning the N-terminal and central portions of the alignment, 
focusing on those sections that characterise the autoregulators but 
distinguish them from those possessing SAND and PHD domains. Two iterations
on SPTR39_17f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 14 sequences was identified. 
