UDPGLUCOSER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 
 
In addition to its well established role in the enzymatic biosynthesis of
carbohydrates, UDP-glucose also acts as an extracellular signalling molecule
through binding to cell-surface receptors [6]. An orphan G protein-coupled
receptor, previously known as KIAA0001 or GPR105, has been identified as a
receptor for UDP-glucose. The receptor is expressed widely, with highest
levels in the placenta, adipose tissue, stomach and intestine, and moderate
levels in various regions of the brain, spleen, lung and heart. Signal
transduction from the receptor is through pertussis toxin-sensitive G
proteins, probably of the Gi class [6.]

UDPGLUCOSER is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
UDP-glucose receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within N- and
C-terminal and loop regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the UDP-glucose receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 resides at the N-terminus; motif 2
spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 encodes the second cytoplasmic
loop; motif 4 lies in the second external loop; motifs 5 and 6 encompass 
the third cytoplasmic loop and the adjacent portions of TM domains 5 and 6;
and motif 7 lies in the third external loop. A single iteration on
SPTR40_18f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being 
identified beyond the starting set.
