YKINASETYK2
Janus kinases (JAKs) are tyrosine kinases that function in membrane-proximal
signalling events initiated by a variety of extracellular factors binding to
cell surface receptors. Many type I and II cytokine receptors lack a protein
tyrosine kinase domain and rely on JAKs to initiate the cytoplasmic signal 
transduction cascade [1,2]. Ligand binding induces oligomerisation of the
receptors, which then activates the cytoplasmic receptor-associated JAKs.
These subsequently phosphorylate tyrosine residues along the receptor chains
with which they are associated. The phosphotyrosine residues are a target
for a variety of SH2 domain-containing transducer proteins. Amongst these
are the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins,
which, after binding to the receptor chains, are phosphorylated by the JAK
proteins. Phosphorylation enables the STAT proteins to dimerise and
translocate into the nucleus, where they alter the expression of cytokine-
regulated genes. This system is known as the JAK-STAT pathway [3]

Four mammalian JAK family members have been identified: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, 
and TYK2. They are relatively large kinases of approximately 1150 amino 
acids, with molecular weights of ~120-130kDa. Their amino acid sequences
are characterised by the presence of 7 highly conserved domains, termed
JAK homology (JH) domains [4]. The C-terminal domain (JH1) is responsible 
for the tyrosine kinase function. The next domain in the sequence (JH2) is 
known as the tyrosine kinase-like domain, as its sequence shows high 
similarity to functional kinases but does not possess any catalytic 
activity [5]. Although the function of this domain is not well established,
there is some evidence for a regulatory role on the JH1 domain, thus
modulating catalytic activity [6]. The N-terminal portion of the JAKs 
(spanning JH7 to JH3) is important for receptor association and 
non-catalytic activity [7].

TYK2 was first identified by low-stringency hybridisation screening of a
human lymphoid cDNA library with the catalytic domain of proto-oncogene 
c-fms [8]. Mouse and puffer fish orthlogues have also been identified. In 
common with JAK1 and JAK2, and by contrast with JAK3, TYK2 appears to be 
ubiquitously expressed [2]. 

YKINASETYK2 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
non-receptor tyrosine-protein kinase TYK2 proteins. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions in the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise TYK2 but distinguish it from other family members
- motif 1 lies in the JH6 domain; motif 2 resides in the JH5 domain; and 
motif 3 lies in the JH3 domain. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required 
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 4 sequences was 
identified. 
