TNFACTORR5
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on 
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many 
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The 
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are 
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore 
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation, 
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the 
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial 
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that 
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and 
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart 
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 5 (also known as CD40 antigen) is expressed by a wide variety 
of cell types, including B lymphocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, 
endothelial cells and epithelial cells. The receptor plays an important
role in T cell-mediated B lymphocyte activation [7].

TNFACTORR5 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 5. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those 
that characterise TNF receptor 5 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motifs 1-3 reside within the extracellular N-terminal region;
and motifs 4 and 5 lie within the intracellular C-terminal region. Two 
iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified. Three partial 
matches were also found: Q6P2H9_HUMAN and A2A5L5_MOUSE are truncated human
and mouse receptors, respectively, which fail to match motifs 4 and 5; and
Q9DDD2_CHICK is a chicken TNF receptor 5 that fails to match motifs 1-3.
