NACHANNEL4
Voltage-dependent sodium channels are transmembrane (TM) proteins
responsible for the depolarising phase of the action potential in most
electrically excitable cells [1]. They may exist in 3 states [3]: the
resting state, where the channel is closed; the activated state, where the
channel is open; and the inactivated state, where the channel is closed
and refractory to opening. Several different structurally and functionally
distinct isoforms are found in mammals, coded for by a multigene family
[4], these being responsible for the different types of sodium ion currents
found in excitable tissues.
                
The structure of sodium channels is based on 4 internal repeats of a 6-helix
bundle [2] (in which 5 of the membrane-spanning segments are hydrophobic and
the other is positively charged), forming a 24-helical bundle. The charged
segments are believed to be localised within clusters formed by their 5
hydrophobic neighbours: it is postulated that the charged domain may be the
voltage sensor region, possibly moving outward on depolarisation, causing a
conformational change. This model, proposed by Noda et al. [2], contrasts
with that of Sato and Matsumoto [5], in which the TM segments are juxtaposed
octagonally. The basic structural motif (the 6-helix bundle) is also found
in potassium and calcium channel alpha subunits.

The SCN4A gene belongs to the Nav1 family, which also includes SCN1A, SCN2A,
SCN3A, SCN5A and SCN8A. This family is typically expressed in the brain,
spinal cord, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle and peripheral neurons [6].
Mutations in SCN4A are associated with hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis,
paramyotonia congenita and a diverse group of disorders collectively known
as potassium-aggravated myotonia. These are characterised by skeletal muscle
hyperexcitability or muscle weakness, which is exacerbated by exposure to
cold temperature [7].

NACHANNEL4 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
voltage-gated Na+ channel alpha 4 subunit. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the N-terminal third of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise the alpha 4 subunits but distinguish them from
the rest of the voltage-gated Na+ channel superfamily - motif 1 resides at
the N-terminus; motifs 2 and 3 span the loop between the first and second 
repeat; and motif 4 lies in the loop between TM domain 6 of the first repeat
and TM domain 1 of the second repeat. Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5
sequences was identified.
