RETINOLBNDNG
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration, and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Serum Retinol Binding Protein (RBP) [5] is virtually the sole retinol
transporter in plasma, binding a single all-trans-retinol molecule as its
physiological ligand. RBP is synthesised in hepatic parenchymal cells, where
the apoprotein is loaded with retinol, triggering its release into general
circulation. 85-90% of plasma RBP carries bound retinol, while about 96% is
complexed to transthyretin. Transthyretin has a higher affinity for halo-RBP 
than apo RBP, and its interaction with RBP is also sensitive to both ionic
strength and pH; the complex dissociates at low ionic strength and is only 
stable between pH 5.0 and 9.0. The RBP-transthyretin complex is larger than 
RBP, preventing its loss by filtration through the kidney glomeruli. RBP-
mediated retinol transport facilitates the transfer of insoluble retinol 
from storage sites to peripheral tissues. RBP also protects bound retinol
from oxidation. The synthesis of RBP regulates retinol release from the 
liver and controls the specificity of its uptake by target cells. RBP-
target-cell interaction is crucial to its biological function: RBP is 
recognised by a cell-surface receptor, releasing retinol, and losing its 
affinity for transthyretin. The resulting apo-RBP is filtered by the kidney,
reabsorbed and catabolised. RBP carries only one retinol molecule before
being degraded.

It seems that retinol is taken up by target cells through a specific cell-
surface receptor that recognises RBP. Using mutagenesis, Sivaprasadarao has
shown that specific amino acids within the open-end loop scaffold are
responsible for binding to the RBP receptor [6], and proposes that RBP 
remains external to the cell, with only retinol being internalised by the 
RBP receptor in a manner not involving receptor-mediated endocytosis. By 
contrast, Noy and co-workers have suggested that retinol dissociates
spontaneously from RBP outside the cell and undergoes passive transfer
through the plasma membrane to be bound by high-affinity sites in the 
cytoplasm [7]. 

RETINOLBNDNG is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
plasma retinol binding proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the retinol binding proteins but distinguish
them from the rest of lipocalin superfamily - motif 2 includes the GxW 
triplet that forms part of the first beta-strand (cf. LIPOCALIN signature
motif 1 and PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213)); motif 3 includes the
N-terminus of strand 2; motif 4 encodes strand 3; motif 5 includes strand
5; motif 6 spans the C-terminus of strand 6 and strand 7; and motif 7 spans
the C-terminus of strand 8 and the N-terminus of helix 2. Two iterations on 
SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 12 sequences was identified. 
