SEPTIN3
Septins constitute a eukaryotic family of guanine nucleotide-binding proteins.
Members of the family were first identified by genetic screening for 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants defective in cytokinesis [1]. Temperature-
sensitive mutations in four genes, CDC3, CDC10, CDC11 and CDC12, were found
to cause cell-cycle arrest and defects in bud growth and cytokinesis. The
protein products of these genes localise at the division plane between
mother and daughter cells, indicating a role in mother-daughter separation
during cytokinesis [2]. Members of the family were therefore termed septins
to reflect their role in septation and cell division. The identification of
septin homologues in higher eukaryotes, which localise to the cleavage
furrow in dividing cells, supports an orthologous function in cytokinesis.
Septins have since been identified in most eukaryotes, except plants [3].

Septins are approximately 40-50kDa in molecular mass, and typically comprise
a conserved central core domain (>35% sequence identity between mammalian
and yeast homologues) flanked by more divergent N- and C-termini. Most
septins possess a P-loop motif in their N-terminal domain (which is
characteristic of GTP-binding proteins), and a predicted C-terminal coiled-
coil domain [4].

A number of septin interaction partners have been identified in yeast, 
many of which are components of the budding site selection machinery, kinase
cascades or of the ubiquitination pathway [3,4]. It has therefore been 
proposed that septins may act as a scaffold that provides an interaction 
matrix for other proteins. In mammals, septins have been shown to interact
with components of the exocytic machinery, indicating that that may 
regulate vesicle dynamics [5]. Mammalian septins have also been implicated
in a variety of other cellular processes, including apoptosis, carcinogenesis
and neurodegeneration [6].

Septin 3 has been cloned in humans and mice. A rat orthologue has also been
identified, termed G-septin, which shares 95% overall sequence identity with
mouse septin 3. Northern blotting studies indicate that septin 3 expression
is high in the brain but undetectable in other tissues, suggesting that the
protein is primarily neuronal [7].

SEPTIN3 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for septin 3
proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise 
septin 3 but distinguish it from other family members - motif 1 lies in
the N-terminal region prior to the GTP binding site; and motifs 2 and 3
reside in the C-terminal third of the alignment. Two iterations on 
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 3 sequences was identified. 
