2FE2SRDCTASE
Iron is essential for growth in both bacteria and mammals. Controlling the 
amount of free iron in solution is often used as a tactic by hosts to limit 
invasion of pathogenic microbes; binding iron tightly within protein 
molecules can accomplish this. Such iron-protein complexes include haem in 
blood, lactoferrin in tears/saliva, and transferrin in blood plasma. Some 
bacteria express surface receptors to capture eukaryotic iron-binding 
compounds, while others have evolved siderophores (enterobactins) to 
scavenge iron from iron-binding host proteins [1]. 

The control of such siderophore gene expression in Escherichia coli is under 
the regulation of the negative repressor protein FUR [2]. When complexed 
with Fe2+, it down-regulates the transcription not only of the siderophore 
genes, but also of the moieties that release Fe2+ ions bound to the hydrox-
amate enterobactin proteins in the microbial cytoplasm [2]. An example of 
the latter is FhuF from the Gram-negative microbes Yersinia pestis, 
Salmonella typhi, and Escherichia coli [2]. In conjunction with the 
siderophore system, this gene has been demonstrated to be essential for 
growth and virulence in pathogenic enterobacteria [2].

FhuF is a member of the [2Fe-2S] ferric iron reductase family. However, 
in place of the symmetrical tetrahedral arrangement at the ferric iron
binding site, an unusual Cys-Cys C-terminal group distorts the site in this
protein [3]. This property makes FhuF inherently unstable, and another set
of regulatory genes, designated "suf", is thought to maintain its activity
in the cytoplasm [4].

2FE2SRDCTASE is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
bacterial ferric iron reductases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length (~250 amino acids) - motif 8 
spans the ferric iron binding site, which includes 4 cysteine residues. Two 
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified. 
