EAGCHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].

Structurally, EAG channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-gated
K+ channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and 3 kinds of
Ca2+-activated K+ channel (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+ channels share a
characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif that resides between the
2 C-terminal membrane-spanning helices, and forms the K+-selective pore 
domain [1]. However, unlike other families within this structural class,
EAG channels possess a cyclic nucleotide binding domain within their 
putative intracellular C-termini.

The first EAG K+ channel was identified in Drosophila, following a screen 
for mutations giving rise to behavioural abnormalities. Disruption of the
Eag gene caused an ether-induced, leg-shaking behaviour. Subsequent studies
have revealed a conserved multi-gene family of EAG-like K+ channels, which
are present in Homo sapiens and many other species. Based on the varying
functional properties of the channels, the family has been divided into
3 subfamilies: EAG, ELK and ERG. Interestingly, C.elegans appears to lack
the ELK type [3].

The EAG subfamily has been expressed in heterologous systems to reveal their
biophysical and pharmacological functions and to determine their currents in
native tissues. All mammalian EAG subfamily K+ channels that have been 
identified have properties typical of delayed rectifiers, with no measurable
inactivation [5]. Only the Drosophila Eag channel exhibits partial
inactivation.

EAGCHANNEL is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
EAG potassium channels. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the EAG channels but distinguish them from other members
of the K+ channel superfamily - motifs 1-4 reside within the N-terminal 
domain; motif 5 encodes putative TM domain 1; motif 6 encompasses TM domain 
3; motif 7 spans part of the loop between TM domains 3 and 4; motif 8 spans
the loop between TM domains 5 and 6; and motifs 9-12 reside within the 
C-terminal region. Four iterations on SPTR39_14f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was found, Q9XYX7, the C.elegans EAG K+ 
channel EGL-2, which fails to make significant matches with motifs 1, 2, 4,
8 and 12.
