TNFACTORR11B
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptors 11A and 11B mediate the effects of receptor activator for
NF-kappa-B ligand (RANKL), an essential osteoclast regulatory factor. The
receptors have opposing effects - activation of TNF receptor 11A by RANKL
promotes osteoclast differentiation [7], while TNF receptor 11B acts as a
soluble decoy receptor for the ligand, thus inhibiting differentiation [8].

TNF receptor 11B (also known as osteoprotegerin (OPG)) is a secreted protein
that contains two death domains within its C-terminal region. Mutations in 
the TNF receptor 11B gene are associated with the autosomal recessive
osteopathy juvenile Paget disease [9]. The receptor may also be involved in
vascular calcification, and high expression levels in serum are a risk 
factor for the progression of atherosclerosis and the onset of
cardiovascular disease [10].

TNFACTORR11B is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
tumour necrosis factor receptor 11B. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those 
sections that characterise TNF receptor 11B but distinguish it from other
TNF receptor subtypes - motifs 1 and 2 reside in the N-terminal cysteine- 
rich region; motifs 3 and 4 lie partially within the first death domain; 
and motif 5 lies in the C-terminal region beyond the second death domain.
Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified.
