ANNEXINVIII
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster, Xenopus
laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and Neurospora 
crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from those found in
other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium binding sites are found within
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as 
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity,
exocytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the
extracellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA
replication [2].

Human annexin VIII was first identified in 1989 [5]; the 327 amino acid
protein was designated vascular anticoagulant (VAC) beta. It was found to be
expressed in placenta, lung endothelia, skin, liver and kidney. It shares
four internal repeats with other annexin family members, but its 5' coding
DNA sequence and untranslated region are unique [6]. The type VIII gene was 
found to be selectively over-expressed in acute promyelocytic leukaemia, and
differentially expressed by chondrocytes, suggesting a putative link with 
longitudinal growth of the vertebrate skeleton [7].

ANNEXINVIII is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type VIII annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise the type VIII annexins but distinguish them from the rest of 
the annexin family - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 resides between
core repeats 1 and 2, including part of the N-terminal portion of repeat 2;
motif 3 lies between repeats 2 and 3; and motif 4 lies between repeats 3 and
4. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, no
further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
