SPECTRNALPHA
Spectrin is an elongated protein that belongs to a family of related 
molecules (including dystrophin and alpha-actinin) that contain tandemly 
repeated segments and form resilient cellular meshworks by cross-linking 
actin filaments [1]. The protein is an alpha-beta heterodimer [2] in which 
the alpha and beta monomers associate in an anti-parallel fashion [3]. 
Assembly involves initial contact of complementary nucleation sites on each 
subunit, via four tandem repeat regions [3]. Following nucleation, the 
remainder of the subunits associate rapidly along their full lengths to 
form a dimer by super-coiling around each other, forming a rope-like,
flexible rod [3]. Assembly terminates if either polypeptide is interrupted 
by protease cleavage. Heterozygotic mutations involving either nucleation 
site are predicted to affect allele incorporation into the mature membrane 
skeleton [3]. 

The structure of a repeat unit of alpha-spectrin has been determined to 
1.8A resolution by means of X-ray crystallography [1]. This was shown to 
comprise an anti-parallel three-helix bundle separated by two loops, which 
folds into a left-handed coiled coil [4]. At the interface between tandem 
repeats, hydrophobic interactions may constrain intersegment flexibility. 
The interaction between alpha- and beta-subunits is mediated by the 
association of two helices at the C-terminus of the beta-chain and a single 
helix from the N-terminus of the alpha-chain. Mutations that affect these 
critical helix side-chain interactions disrupt spectrin associations that 
sustain the integrity of erythrocyte membranes giving rise to haemolytic 
anaemias [1,4]. These haemolytic syndromes include hereditary ellipto-
cytosis, its aggravated form hereditary pyropoikilocytosis and hereditary
spherocytosis [5,6].

SPECTRNALPHA is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
spectrin alpha chains. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the SH3 domain
in central portion of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise the alpha spectrin SH3 domains and distinguish them from
other closely-related SH3-domain containing proteins. A single 
iteration on SPTR44_27f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR55_38f identified a true set comprising 25 sequences.
