VEGFRECEPTR1
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent and specific
endothelial cell mitogen [1]. Through binding with its receptor, VEGFR, VEGF
has critical roles in the growth and maintenance of vascular endothelial
cells and in the development of new blood- and lymphatic-vessels in
physiological and pathological states [2]. The vessel systems are important 
for the supply of oxygen and nutrients to all tissues of the body, as well
as for the drainage of excess fluids with waste metabolites from peripheral
tissues. VEGF receptors have a characteristic structure, with 7 Ig-like
domains in the extracellular domain and a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain
with a long kinase insert region.

The VEGF receptor family consists of three members, VEGFR-1 (Flt-1), VEGFR-2
(KDR/Flk-1) and VEGFR-3 (Flt-4), all of which belong to the receptor type
tyrosine kinase superfamily [3]. Among these receptors, VEGFR-1 binds
strongest to VEGF, VEGF-2 binds more weakly, and VEGFR-3 shows essentially
no binding, although it does bind to other members of the VEGF family.

The tyrosine kinase domain of VEGFR-1, although much weaker than that of
VEGFR-2, tranduces signals for endothelial cells. A null mutation of VEGFR-1
in mice results in lethality in early embryogenesis, owing to a dis-
organisation of blood vessels and an overgrowth of endothelial-like cells.

VEGFRECEPTR1 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type 1 vascular endothelial growth factor receptors. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the extracellular domain,
focusing on those sections that characterise VEGFR1 subtypes, but 
distinguish them from the rest of the VEGFR family - motif 2 lies in the 
first Ig domain; motif 3 spans beta-strands 1 and 2; motif 5 residues in the
third Ig domain; and motif 7 lies in the fourth Ig domain. Two iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 7 sequences was identified.
