TYPE3OMGPROT
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[2] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [3]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [3], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

One of the outer membrane protein subunit families, termed "G" here for 
nomenclature purposes, aids in the structural assembly of the invasion 
complex [4]. Another characteristic of this family is its ability to form a 
channel through the outer bacterial membrane, allowing secretion to take 
place. Members include the Salmonella InvG and SpiA gene, the Shigella MxiD, 
and the Yersinia Kim5 and YscC proteins. Plant pathogen members include the 
Hypersensitivity Response (HR) genes of Burkholderia and Erwinia.

TYPE3OMGPROT is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type III secretion system outer membrane G protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the C-terminal two-thirds of the alignment.
Nine iterations on SPTR57.15_40.15f were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 373 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are family members that fail
to make significant matches with one or more motifs.
