ORPHNNPRCRSR
Vertebrate endogenous opioid neuropeptides are released by post-transla-
tional proteolytic cleavage of precursor proteins. The precursors consist of
the following components: a signal sequence that precedes a conserved region
of about 50 residues; a variable-length region; and the sequence of the 
neuropeptide itself. Three types of precursor are known: preproenkephalin A
(gene PENK), which is processed to produce 6 copies of Met-enkephalin, plus
Leu-enkephalin; preproenkephalin B (gene PDYN), which is processed to
produce neoendorphin, dynorphin, leumorphin, rimorphin and Leu-enkephalin;
and prepronocipeptin (gene PNOC), whose processing produces nociceptin
(orphanin FQ) and two other potential neuropeptides.

Sequence analysis reveals that the conserved N-terminal region of the
precursors contains 6 cysteines, which are probably involved in disulphide
bond formation. It is speculated that this region might be important for 
neuropeptide processing [1].

Nociceptin (or orphanin FQ) is a natural agonist of opioid receptor-like
receptor [1]. The peptide is derived from the prepronociceptin precursor,
whose gene is predominantly transcribed in the central nervous system 
(brain and spinal cord) and, weakly, in the ovary (the sole peripheral
organ that expresses the gene) [1]. Studies on rat and mouse nociceptin
suggest that the protein functions not only as a neuropeptide precursor
but also as an important component in neuronal differentiation [2]. 

ORPHNNPRCRSR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
nociceptin precursor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning 
the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that characterise the
nociceptin precursors but distinguish them from the rest of the opioid 
neuropeptide precursor family - motifs 1-4 span the N-terminal region 
encoded by PROSITE pattern OPIOIDS_PRECURSOR (PS01252), which contains the 
six conserved cysteines thought to be involved in disulphide bond formation;
motifs 5 and 6 span a conserved region thought to encode a neuropeptide; 
the nociceptin peptide is encoded within the C-terminal portion of motif 6
and the N-terminal half of motif 7; and a second possible neuropeptide 
spans motifs 7 and 8. A single iteration on OWL30.2 was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
