ANNEXINXXXI
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster, Xenopus
laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and Neurospora 
crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from those found in
other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium binding sites are found within
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as 
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity,
exocytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the
extracellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA
replication [2].

Human annexin XXXI was first identified in silico by searches of dbEST with
a number of divergent annexins [5]. The full-length cDNA encoded a protein
of 338 residues, with less than 40% sequence identity to other annexins. The
most striking distinction of the type XXXI subtype is the complete ablation
of all four type II calcium-binding sites in the conserved tetrad core. The 
protein is well represented in actively differentiating tissues.

ANNEXINXXXI is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type XXXI annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise type XXXI annexins but distinguish them from other closely
related annexin subtypes - motifs 1 and 2 lie in the N-terminal section 
preceeding the first core repeat; motif 3 resides within the first repeat;
and motif 4 is located within the fourth endonexin fold. Two iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 4 sequences was identified.
