TSHRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The gonadotrophins (luteinising hormone, choriogonadotrophin, follicle-
stimulating hormone) and thyroid-stimulating hormone are heterotrimeric
glycoproteins composed of a common alpha-subunit and distinct beta-subunits
[6]. The carbohydrate moiety of the glycoproteins has an essential role in
receptor recognition. The receptors share close sequence similarity, and
are characterised by large extracellular domains believed to be involved
in hormone binding via leucine-rich repeats (LRR) [7]. Modelling of this
portion of the receptors suggests that they contain three-dimensional
structures similar to that of porcine ribonuclease inhibitor [7].

TSHR (also known as thyrotrophin) is synthesised in the thyrotroph cells of
the anterior pituitary under the influence of TRH and thyroid hormones [6].
It acts on the thyroid gland, stimulating iodine uptake, synthesis and
release of thyroid hormones, hypertrophy and hyperplasia [6]. Graves disease
is caused by stimulatory anti-TSH receptor antibodies [6]. The receptor is
found in thyroid follicular cells and related cell lines, its predominant
effector pathway being via activation of adenylyl cyclase through Gs [6]. 

Activating somatic mutations in the TSH receptor have been identified as a
cause of hyperfunctioning thyroid adenomas, and germline mutations have been
found in familial non-autoimmune hyperthyroidism and sporadic congenital
hyperthyroidism [8]. To date, all reported mutations have been located in
the TM domain. Now, an example of an activating mutation in the extra-
cellular, TSH-binding domain, has been found in a male infant with
congenital hyperthyroidism due to a toxic adenoma [8]. The results indicate
that activating mutations can also occur in the extracellular domain of the
TSH receptor, and support a model in which this domain serves to restrain
receptor function in the absence of TSH or antibody-induced conformational
changes [8]. 

TSHRECEPTOR is a 15-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
thyrotropin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the TSH receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the
glycoprotein hormone receptor family - motifs 1-13 reside within the 
N-terminal half of the alignment, prior to the TM domains; and motifs 14 and
15 lie at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to
reach convergence, no further sequences being identfied beyond the starting
set. Three partial matches were found, all of which are thyrotropin receptor
variants.
