VOMERONASL1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Pheromones have evolved in all animal phyla, to signal sex and dominance
status, and are responsible for stereotypical social and sexual behaviour
among members of the same species. In mammals, these chemical signals are
believed to be detected primarily by the vomeronasal organ (VNO), a
chemosensory organ located at the base of the nasal septum [7]. The VNO is
present in most amphibia, reptiles and non-primate mammals but is absent in
birds, adult catarrhine monkeys and apes [6]. An active role for the human
VNO in the detection of pheromones is disputed; the VNO is clearly present 
in the foetus but appears to be atrophied or absent in adults [6]. Three 
distinct families of putative pheromone receptors have been identified in 
the vomeronasal organ (V1Rs, V2Rs and V3Rs). All are G protein-coupled 
receptors but are only distantly related to the receptors of the main 
olfactory system, highlighting their different role [7].

The V1 receptors share between 50 and 90% sequence identity but have little
similarity to other families of G protein-coupled receptors. They appear to
be distantly related to the mammalian T2R bitter taste receptors [7] and the
rhodopsin-like GPCRs [8]. In rat, the family comprises 30-40 genes. These
are expressed in the apical regions of the VNO, in neurons expressing Gi2.
Coupling of the receptors to this protein mediates inositol trisphosphate
signalling [7]. A number of human V1 receptor homologues have also been
found. The majority of these human sequences are pseudogenes [9] but an
apparently functional receptor has been identified that is expressed in the
human olfactory system [10].

VOMERONASL1R is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
vomeronasal type 1 receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within the loop and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the vomeronasal type 1 receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily -
motif 1 lies in the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 2 spans the first external
loop; motif 3 encodes the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 lies in the
second external loop; motifs 5 and 6 span the third cytoplasmic loop; motif
7 encodes the third external loop; and motif 8 resides at the C-terminus.
Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 12 sequences was identified.
