NTKRECEPTOR3
Neurotrophins are a family of secreted proteins that regulate development, 
maintenance and function of vertebrate nervous systems. They act via two 
different classes of receptor: p75NTR (a member of the TNF receptor 
superfamily), and neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptors (NTRKs) - also 
known as tropomyosin-related kinases (Trks) [1]. 

NTRKs are multi-domain, transmembrane proteins - in addition to their
cytoplasmic kinase domains, members of the family possess a number of
extracellular leucine-rich repeat (LRR) and Ig-like C2-type regions. Ligand
binding induces them to dimerise, resulting in activation of their
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains. The activated receptors couple to a
variety of intracellular signalling cascades, including the Ras,
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI-3 kinase), mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase, and phospholipase C (PLC)-gamma pathways [2].

NTRK3 (also termed TrkC) is a high-affinity receptor for neurotrophin-3
(NT-3). The receptor is widely expressed in the developing nervous system,
and is also found in many non-neuronal tissues [3]. In addition to roles in
synaptogenesis [4] and neuronal differentiation [5], NTRK3 is implicated in
peripheral nerve cell myelination, mediating the inhibitory effects of NT-3
on this process [6].

NTKRECEPTOR3 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 3. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal extracellular domain, focusing on
those sections that characterise NTRK3 but distinguish it from other members
of the NTRK family - motif 1 lies in the signal sequence; and motifs 3 and 4
reside within the second Ig-like C2-type region, each encompassing a short
region of beta strand. Two iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, Q2PFX3_MACFA, a 
translated macaque cDNA that fails to match motifs 1 and 2.
