OREXIN1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The hypothalamus plays a central role in the integrated control of feeding
and energy homeostasis [6]. A new family of neuropeptides, orexins, have
been identified that bind and activate two closely related (previously) 
orphan GPCRs [6,7]. Orexins stimulate appetite and food consumption [7].
Their genes are expressed bilaterally and symmetrically in the lateral
hypothalamus, which has been shown to be the "feeding centre". By contrast,
the "satiety centre" is expressed in the ventromedial hypothalamus and is
dominated by the leptin-regulated neuropeptide network.

Both orexin receptors exhibit a similar pharmacology - the 2 orexin
peptides, orexin-A and orexin-B, bind to both receptors and, in each case,
agonist binding results in an increase in intracellular calcium levels. 
However, orexin-B shows a 10-fold selectivity for orexin receptor
type 2, whilst orexin-A is equipotent at both receptors [8].

OREXIN1R is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 1
orexin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
C-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise the type 1 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the orexin receptor family - motif 1 spans the third cytoplasmic loop; and
motifs 2-4 reside at the cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single iteration on
SPTR39_15f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.
