TNFACTORR1A
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 1A (also known as TNF-R1 and CD120a antigen) contains a death 
domain within its C-terminal region that mediates interactions with several
proteins involved in signalling the downstream effects of TNF. Activation of
the receptor may induce either cell survival or apoptosis, the latter 
proceeding via recruitment of the adaptor protein FADD and caspase-8 to the
receptor complex [7]. Defects in TNF receptor 1A are the cause of familial 
hibernian fever (FHF) - an autosomal dominant disease characterised by 
recurrent fever, abdominal pain, localised tender skin lesions and myalgia.

TNFACTORR1A is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 1A. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise TNF receptor 1A but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motifs 1-3 reside within the extracellular N-terminal region,
each encompassing a short region of beta strand; and motif 4 lies within the
death domain in the intracellular C-terminal portion of the alignment. Two 
iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 10 sequences was identified.
