RTXTOXINC
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. Four principal exotoxin secretion systems have been described
[1]. In the type II and IV secretion systems, toxins are first exported to
the periplasm by way of a cleaved N-terminal signal sequence; a second set
of proteins is used for extracellular transport (type II), or the C-terminus
of the exotoxin itself is used (type IV). Type III secretion involves at 
least 20 molecules that assemble into a needle; effector proteins are then 
translocated through this without need of a signal sequence. In the Type I 
system, a complete channel is formed through both membranes, and the 
secretion signal is carried on the C-terminus of the exotoxin. 

The RTX (repeats in toxin) family of cytolytic toxins belong to the Type I 
secretion system, and are important virulence factors in Gram-negative 
bacteria. As well as the C-terminal signal sequence, several glycine-rich
repeats are also found. These are essential for binding calcium, and are
critical for the biological activity of the secreted toxins [2,3]. All RTX
toxin operons exist in the order rtxCABD, RtxA protein being the structural
component of the exotoxin, both RtxB and D being required for its export
from the bacterial cell; RtxC is an acyl-carrier-protein-dependent acyl-
modification enzyme, required to convert RtxA to its active form [4].

Escherichia coli hemolysin (HlyA) is often quoted as the model for RTX 
toxins. Recent work on its relative rtxC gene product HlyC [5] has revealed 
that it provides the acylation aspect for post-translational modification
of two internal lysine residues in the HlyA protein. Other residues,
including His23 and two conserved tyrosine residues, also appear to be 
important [6]. 

RTXTOXINC is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the Gram-
negative bacterial RTX toxin-activating protein C family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length (~150
amino acids) - motif 1 contains the putative active site histidine. Two 
iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified. 
