ICAM
Intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs) are part of the immunoglobulin
superfamily. They are important in inflammation, immune responses and in 
intracellular signalling events [1]. 

The ICAM family consists of five members, designated ICAM-1 to ICAM-5. They
are known to bind to leucocyte integrins CD11/CD18 during inflammation and
in immune responses. In addition, ICAMs may exist in soluble forms in human
plasma, due to activation and proteolysis mechanisms at cell surfaces [1]. 

ICAM-1 (CD54) contains five Ig-like domains. It is expressed on leucocytes, 
endothelial and epithelial cells, and is upregulated in response to 
bacterial invasion. The protein is a receptor for CD11a,b/CD18 (also termed
leukocyte-function associated (LFA) antigen), fibrinogen, human rhinoviruses
and plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes. ICAM-1 binding sites for 
CD11a/CD18 and its other binding partners are located in the first domain 
and are overlapping. ICAM-1 domain 2 seems to play an important role in 
maintaining the conformation of domain 1 and particularly the structural 
integrity of the CD11a/CD18 ligand-binding site [3]. 

The 3-dimensional atomic structure of the tandem N-terminal Ig-like domains 
(D1 and D2) of ICAM-1 has been determined to 2.2A resolution and fitted into
a cryoelectron microscopy reconstruction of a rhinovirus-ICAM-1 complex [4].
Extensive charge interactions between ICAM-1 and human rhinoviruses are
largely conserved in  major and minor receptor groups of rhinoviruses [4].
The interaction of ICAMs with LFA-1 is mediated by a divalent cation bound
to the insertion (I)-domain on the alpha chain of LFA-1 and the carboxyl 
group of a conserved glutamic acid residue on ICAMs [4]. 

ICAM-2 (CD102) has two Ig-like domains. It is expressed on endothelial
cells, leucocytes and platelets, and binds to CD11a,b/CD18. The protein is
refractory to proinflammatory cytokines, and plays an important role in the
adhesion of leucocytes to the uninduced endothelium [5].

ICAM-3 (CD50) contains five Ig-like domains and binds to leucocyte integrins
CD11a,d/CD18. The protein plays an important role in the immune response and
perhaps in signal transduction [6].

ICAM-4 (LW blood group Ag) is red blood cell (RBC) specific and binds to 
CD11a,b/CD18. It is associated with the RBC Rh antigens and could be 
important in retaining immature red cells in the bone marrow, or in the 
uptake of senescent cells into the spleen [7].

ICAM-5 (telencephalin) has nine Ig-like domains and is confined to the 
telencephalon of the brain. The role of this CD11a/CD18 binding molecule 
is not yet known [8].

ICAM is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the ICAM
family of adhesion molecules. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
towards the N-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 lies within the 
N-terminal region of domain 2; and motifs 2 and 3 lie in the N-terminal
region of the extracellular domain. Two iterations on SPTR39_14f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 14 
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, Q9Z133, a
testicular cell adhesion molecule 1 (TCAM1) from Rattus norvegicus that
matches motifs 2 and 3.
