CHEMOKINER10
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Chemokines are proteins that have important physiological and patho- 
physiological roles in a wide range of acute and chronic inflammatory
processes [6]. Their sequences are similar and are characterised by a 
4-cysteine motif: the family can be divided according to whether the
first 2 Cys residues are adjacent (the C-C family), or separated by an
intervening residue (the C-x-C family). C-C chemokines are chemoattractant
for monocytes but not for neutrophils. The C-C family includes human
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), regulated on activation, normal
T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), and macrophage inflammatory 
proteins (MIP-1a and MIP-1b) [6].

C-C chemokine receptors are found in monocytes, lymphocytes, basophils and
eosinophils; mRNA is also found in some cell lines [6]. MCP-1 and MIP-1a
induce activation in low nanomolar concentrations and are highly selective
relative to C-x-C receptors. Calcium mobilisation has been demonstrated in
monocytes and in cells expressing the recombinant C-C receptor via an
uncharacterised G protein; pertussis toxin inhibits some of its actions [6].

An orphan receptor, G protein-coupled receptor 2 (GPR2), was recently 
identified to be the target of the skin-associated chemokine CCL27. This 
receptor was designated CC chemokine receptor 10 (CC CKR10) [7,8]. Human and
murine forms of the receptor have been cloned and found to be expressed at 
high levels in the testis, small intestine, foetal lung and kidney, with 
lower expression in the spleen, thymus, lymph node, colon and heart. 
Application of CCL27 chemokine to murine cells expressing CC CKR10 results 
in intracellular calcium mobilisation and transfectant cell migration [8].

CHEMOKINER10 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type
10 C-C chemokine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the type 10 receptors but distinguish them from the rest 
of the C-C chemokine receptor family - motif 1 lies in the extracellular
N-terminal region; motif 2 spans part of the second extracellular loop and 
part of TM domain 5; motif 3 lies partially in the third extracellular loop
and partially in TM domain 7; and motif 4 resides within the cytoplasmic 
C-terminal region. A single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to 
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting
set.
