P2X3RECEPTOR
P2X purinoceptors are cell membrane ion channels, gated by adenosine
5'-triphosphate (ATP) and other nucleotides. They have been found to be
widely expressed on mammalian cells, and, by means of their functional 
properties, can be differentiated into three sub-groups. The first group is
almost equally well activated by ATP and its analogue alphabetamethyleneATP,
whereas, the second group is not activated by the latter compound. A third
type of receptor (also called P2Z) is distinguished by the fact that
repeated or prolonged agonist application leads to the opening of much
larger pores, allowing large molecules to traverse the cell membrane. This
increased permeability rapidly leads to cell death, and lysis.

Molecular cloning studies have identified seven P2X receptor subtypes,
designated P2X1-P2X7. These receptors are proteins that share 35-48% amino
acid identity, and possess two putative transmembrane (TM) domains,
separated by a long (~270 residues) intervening sequence, which is
thought to form an extracellular loop. Around 1/4 of the residues within
the loop are invariant between the cloned subtypes, including 10
characteristic cysteines.

Studies of the functional properties of heterologously expressed P2X
receptors, together with the examination of their distribution in native
tissues, suggests they likely occur as both homo- and heteromultimers
in vivo [1,2].

When expressed, P2X3 receptors (like P2X1 receptors) are found to be
equally well activated by alphabetamethyleneATP and ATP. P2X3 receptors
desensitise rapidly, with the decay being best-fit by two exponentials,
with time constants of ~50 and 300 ms [2].

P2X3RECEPTOR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
P2X purinoceptor isoform 3. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the P2X purinoceptor isoform 3 but distinguish it from
others - motifs 1-7 lie within the exoplasmic loop connecting the two
putative TM domains; and motifs 8-9 encode portions of the cytoplasmic
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
