HCO3TRNSPORT
Bicarbonate (HCO3-) transport mechanisms are the principal regulators of pH
in animal cells. Such transport also plays a vital role in acid-base
movements in the stomach, pancreas, intestine, kidney, reproductive organs
and the central nervous system. Functional studies have suggested four
different HCO3- transport modes. Anion exchanger proteins exchange HCO3-
for Cl- in a reversible, electroneutral manner [1]. Na+/HCO3- co-transport
proteins mediate the coupled movement of Na+ and HCO3- across plasma
membranes, often in an electrogenic manner [2]. Na- driven Cl-/HCO3-
exchange and K+/HCO3- exchange activities have also been detected in 
certain cell types, although the molecular identities of the proteins
responsible remain to be determined.

Sequence analysis of the two families of HCO3- transporters that have been
cloned to date (the anion exchangers and Na+/HCO3- co-transporters) reveals
that they are homologous. This is not entirely unexpected, given that they
both transport HCO3- and are inhibited by a class of pharmacological agents
called disulphonic stilbenes [3]. They share around ~25-30% sequence
identity, which is distributed along their entire sequence length, and have
similar predicted membrane topologies, suggesting they have ~10
transmembrane (TM) domains.

HCO3TRNSPORT is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
HCO3- transporter superfamily. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
from the central portion of the alignment - motif 1 lies near the end of
the long presumed-cytoplasmic N-terminus; motifs 2-3 encode most of the
first TM domain; motif 4 spans the end of fourth TM domain and the start 
of the following cytoplasmic loop; motif 5 encodes ~2/3 of the fifth TM 
domain; motif 6 lies on the sixth TM domain; motif 7 encodes a portion of
the seventh TM domain; and motif 8 lies on the putative extracellular loop,
between TM domains 7 and 8. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 28 sequences was
identified.
