FIMREGULATRY
The Gram-negative pathogen Escherichia coli causes several common bacterial 
illnesses in humans, including diarrhoea, neonatal meningitidis and urinary 
tract infections. Attachment to host tissues is essential for successful 
invasion, and requires interaction between a bacterial adhesive protein and 
its target receptor. This protein is usually supported on a larger structure 
made up of heteropolymeric fibres [1]. Pyelonephritogenic E.coli
specifically invade the uroepithelium by expressing between 100 and 300 
pili on their cell surface. Pili are macromolecular structures that allow 
binding to a digalactoside receptor in the urinary tract. Control of  
transcription of these moieties is carried out by a regulatory protein, 
situated adjacent to the pili genes on the host genome.

P pili, or fimbriae, are ~68A in diameter and 1 micron in length, the
bulk of which is a fibre composed of the main structural protein PapA [1].
At its tip, the pilus is terminated by a fibrillum consisting of repeating
units of the PapE protein. This, in turn, is topped by the adhesins, PapF
and PapG, both of which are needed for receptor binding. The tip fibrillum
is anchored to the main PapA fibre by the PapK pilus-adaptor protein. PapH,
an outer membrane protein, then anchors the entire rod in the bacterial
envelope [2]. A cytoplasmic chaperone (PapD) assists in assembling the 
monomers of the macromolecule in the membrane. 

All of the functional pap genes are arranged in a cluster (operon) on the 
Escherichia genome. It is believed that selective pressure exerted by the 
host's urinal and intestinal tract isoreceptors forced the spread of this 
operon to other strains via lateral transfer [3]. PapB, encoded within the 
cluster, acts as a transcriptional regulator of the functional pap genes
and is located in the bacterial cytoplasm [4]. Its mechanism involves
differential binding to separate sites in the cluster, suggesting that 
this protein is both an activator and repressor of pilus-adhesion 
transcription. The protein shares similarity with other E.coli fimbrial-
adhesion transcription regulators, such as AfaA, DaaA and FanB.

FIMREGULATRY is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the Escherichia coli P pili regulatory PapB protein family. The fingerprint 
was derived from an initial alignment of 12 sequences: the motifs were 
drawn from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~100 
amino acids). A single iteration on SPTR39_14f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
