KIMPTPASE
Tyrosine-specific protein phosphatases (PTPases) catalyse the removal of
phosphate groups attached to tyrosine residues [1-5]. The enzymes play an
important role in the control of cell growth, proliferation, differentiation
and transformation. Multiple forms of PTPase have been characterised and can
be classified into 2 groups: soluble PTPases and transmembrane (TM) receptor
proteins that contain PTPase domains.

The structures of receptor PTPases comprise a variable length extracellular
domain, followed by a TM region and a cytoplasmic C-terminal catalytic 
domain. The extracellular regions of some receptor PTPases house fibronectin
type III repeats, immunoglobulin-like domains, MAM domains or carbonic 
anhydrase-like domains. The cytoplasmic region generally contains 2 copies 
of the PTPase domain: the first of these is enzymatically active; the second
is inactive, but appears to affect substrate specificity in the first. 
PTPase domains contain ~300 residues, including 2 conserved cysteines, the 
second of which is required for activity. Other conserved residues in its 
immediate vicinity are also catalytically important [1-5].

The family of Kinase Interaction Motif (KIM)-containing phosphatases 
consists of PTP-STEP, PTP-SL and LC-PTP. Each contains a KIM in the N-
terminal portion of the molecule. The KIM sequence mediates interaction with
MAP kinases, predominantly ERK1 and ERK2. It has been experimentally shown 
that over-expression of PTP-SL down-regulates the activation of ERK2 and its 
nuclear translocation [6-7].

KIMPTPASE is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the KIM- 
containing protein tyrosine phosphatases. The fingerprint was derived from 
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those 
sections that characterise the KIM-containing PTPases but distinguish them 
from other members of the PTP family - motif 3 includes the C-terminus of
alpha-helix 1; motif 4 includes helix 5; motif 5 spans the C-terminus of
beta-strand 2 and helix 7; motif 6 encodes the N-terminal portion of helix
10; motif 7 encodes the central portion of helix 11; and motif 8 includes
the C-terminal portion of helix 13. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 12 
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found: Q9BE09
is a hypothetical sequence from the crab-eating macaque, which fails to 
match the C-terminal 3 motifs; the rest are PTPases that fail to match 
motifs 2 and 5-8.
