STAPHEXOTOXN 
Staphylococcus aureus is a well-characterised and specialised prokaryotic 
human pathogen, expressing a variety of virulence factors to enable 
successful infection of the host [1]. Symptoms usually manifest in cases of 
food poisoning, pyrogenic fever and toxic shock syndrome, and can prove 
lethal in immunocompromised patients [1]. Of all the exotoxins secreted from 
the bacterial cell, superantigens and hemolysins are amongst the most 
studied [1].

Recently, a novel gene cluster encoding several new superantigen exotoxin-
like virulence factors has been isolated from S.aureus [2]. Although the 
gene products elicit classic symptoms of pyrogenic fever and food poisoning 
in susceptible animal models, their overall similarity to sequences of known
superantigens and hemolysins is limited [2]. However, they do share regions 
of higher similarity in several key functional domains, leading these 
moieties to be termed Staphylococcal Exotoxin-like Enterotoxins (SETs), 15 
of which have so far been isolated from pathogenic strains [2]. 

The crystal structure of S.aureus Set3 enterotoxin has been resolved to 1.9A
by means of X-ray crystallography [3]. It reveals the two-fold structure 
characteristic of the superantigen superfamily: an N-terminal OB fold and 
a C-terminal beta-grasp domain, joined by an N-terminal alpha-helix [3].  
However, it differs significantly in several places. Beta-strands 6 and 7 
protrude from the molecular surface in the beta-grasp domain, unlike the 
usually smooth surface of other superantigens. Also, there appears to be 
a large, saddle-shaped positively-charged surface capable of binding 
negatively-charged molecules, such as DNA [3].

STAPHEXOTOXN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Staphylococcus aureus exotoxins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 2 includes the C- 
terminus of beta-strand 5; motif 3 encompasses strand 8 and the N-terminus 
of alpha-helix 4; and motif 4 encodes strand 10. Two iterations on 
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 17 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found,  
both Staphyloccocal hypothetical proteins that failed to match motifs 1-2.
