VEGFRECEPTR2
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent and specific
endothelial cell mitogen [1]. Through binding with its receptor, VEGFR, VEGF
has critical roles in the growth and maintenance of vascular endothelial
cells and in the development of new blood- and lymphatic-vessels in
physiological and pathological states [2]. The vessel systems are important 
for the supply of oxygen and nutrients to all tissues of the body, as well
as for the drainage of excess fluids with waste metabolites from peripheral
tissues. VEGF receptors have a characteristic structure, with 7 Ig-like
domains in the extracellular domain and a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domain
with a long kinase insert region.

The VEGF receptor family consists of three members, VEGFR-1 (Flt-1), VEGFR-2
(KDR/Flk-1) and VEGFR-3 (Flt-4), all of which belong to the receptor type
tyrosine kinase superfamily [3]. Among these receptors, VEGFR-1 binds
strongest to VEGF, VEGF-2 binds more weakly, and VEGFR-3 shows essentially
no binding, although it does bind to other members of the VEGF family.

The tyrosine kinase domain of VEGFR-2 tranduces signals for endothelial
cells with a greater efficacy than VEGFR-1. VEGFR-2 expression in adult
endothelial cells appears to account for most of the mitogenic and
chemotactic effects of VEGF [4]. At the post-receptor level, activation of
endothelial cells by VEGF leads to the autophosphorylation of VEGFR-2 and
the subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation of numerous downstream targets.

VEGFRECEPTR2 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type 2 vascular endothelial growth factor receptors. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise VEGFR2 subtypes, but distinguish them 
from the rest of the VEGFR family - motifs 1-4 lie in the extracellular
domain, motif 1 residing in the 2nd Ig domain and motif 3 in the 5th Ig
domain; and motifs 5-7 lie in the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Two
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified.
