NRPEPTIDEY1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is one of the most abundant peptides in mammalian
brain, inducing a variety of behavioural effects (e.g., stimulation of food
intake, anxiety, facilitation of learning and memory, and regulation of the
cardiovascular and neuroendocrine systems) [6]. In the periphery, NPY 
stimulates vascular smooth muscle contraction and modulates hormone
secretion. NPY has been implicated in the pathophysiology of hypertension, 
congestive heart failure, affective disorders and appetite regulation [6].

Several pharmacologically distinct neuropeptide Y receptors have been 
characterised, designated NPY Y1-Y6. The Y1 receptor is present in smooth
muscle (e.g., intestine and blood vessels), and has also been described
in cell lines. The receptors are believed to have a predominantly post-
synaptic location [6], and are involved in the inhibition of adenylyl
cyclase through a pertussis-toxin-sensitive G protein, probably of the
G0/Gi class [6]. There is also evidence that NPY can stimulate an increase
in intracellular calcium independently of the phosphoinositide pathway [6].

NRPEPTIDEY1R is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
neuropeptide Y1 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the Y1 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the neuropeptide Y family - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus, leading into
TM domain 1; motifs 2 and 3 span the C-terminus of TM domain 4 and the
second external loop; motif 4 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 5
spans the third external loop; and motifs 6 and 7 reside at the C-terminus. 
A single iteration on OWL30.2 was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches 
were found: NY6R_MOUSE is a neuropeptide Y6 receptor that matches motifs 2,
6 and 7; and OAU62122 is an ovine neuropeptide Y1 receptor fragment that 
matches motifs 2 and 3. 

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences, and 3
partial matches.
