DIUHORMONER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a
manner reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to inter-
act with G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been
proposed to account for this, there is no significant sequence similarity
between these families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own
unique '7TM' signature.

Insect diuretic hormones regulate fluid and ion secretion, and the receptors
with which they interact are attractive targets for new insect control
agents [6]. Diuretic hormone receptors from the moth, Manduca sexta, and the
house cricket, Acheta domesticus, share 53% sequence identity and have been 
shown to be members of the secretin-like family of GPCRs [7]. The receptors
bind diuretic hormone with high affinity and stimulate adenylate cyclase 
with high potency. 

DIUHORMONER is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
diuretic hormone receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the diuretic hormone receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the secretin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie immediately
N-terminal to TM domain 1; motif 3 spans TM domain 2; motif 4 resides in 
the loop between TM domains 3 and 4; motif 5 lies between TM domains 4 and 
5; motif 6 spans the C-terminal portion of TM domain 6 and its following
loop; and motifs 7 and 8 reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration on
SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set. 
