AP2ATNSCPFCT
Activator protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factors constitute a family of
closely related and evolutionarily conserved proteins that bind to the DNA 
consensus sequence GCCNNNGGC and stimulate target gene transcription [1,2].
Four different isoforms of AP-2 have been identifed in mammals, termed AP-2
alpha, beta, gamma and delta. Each family member shares a common structure, 
possessing a proline/glutamine-rich domain in the N-terminal region, which 
is responsible for transcriptional activation [1], and a helix-span-helix
domain in the C-terminal region, which mediates dimerisation and site-
specific DNA binding [2].

The AP-2 family have been shown to be critical regulators of gene expression
during embryogenesis. They regulate the development of facial prominence and
limb buds, and are essential for cranial closure and development of the lens
[3]; they have also been implicated in tumorigenesis. AP-2 protein 
expression levels have been found to affect cell transformation, tumour 
growth and metastasis, and may predict survival in some types of cancer [4,5].

AP-2 alpha was initially isolated from human HeLa cells [6]. The protein was
shown to bind to enhancer regions of the SV40 and human metallothionein IIA 
promoters, and to stimulate RNA synthesis [6]. AP-2 alpha gene knockout in 
mice causes neural-tube defects during embryogenesis, leading to craniofacial
abnormalities and anencephaly [7]. In humans, deletion of chromosome 6
region 6p24-p25, which includes the AP-2 alpha gene, is associated with
microphthalmia, corneal clouding and a number of other dysmorphic features, 
including hypertelorism, micrognathia, dysplastic ears, thin limbs, and 
congenital cardiac defects [8].

AP2ATNSCPFCT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
transcription factor AP-2 alpha proteins. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions in the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections
that characterise AP-2 alpha but distinguish it from other family members - 
motifs 1-3 span the transcriptional activation domain. Two iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 10 sequences was identified. 
