NAKCLTRSPRT2
The Na-K-Cl co-transporters are a family of integral membrane proteins that
are ubiquitously expressed in animal tissues, serving a variety of
functions. In cells of Cl- absorptive and Cl- secretory epithelia, Na-K-Cl
co-transport serves as the major Cl- entry pathway, and functions in
concert with other membrane ion channels and pumps to carry out net trans-
epithelial movement of salt. This vectorial transport of Cl- across
epithelia is involved in the reabsorption of salt in the vertebrate kidney
(which is crucial for urinary concentration), and in the secretion of salt
in such tissues as the mammalian intestine and trachea. In addition, 
Na-K-Cl co-transport is known to play a role in cell volume regulation in
most mammalian cell types. The proteins mediate the coupled, electroneutral
transport of sodium, potassium and chloride ions across the plasma membrane
of cells (with a stoichiometry of 1:1:2, respectively). Co-transport of all
three ions is obligatory, since absence of one is sufficient to prevent ion
movement. Their transport activity does not alter the cell's membrane 
potential, thus the driving force for the transport is determined solely
by the chemical gradients of the three transported ions; hence, under
normal physiological conditions, the direction will be inward.

Recent molecular studies have identified two distinct isoforms: one from
Cl- secretory epithelia, NKCC1; and another, NKCC2, found specifically in
the diluting segment of the vertebrate kidney, a Cl- absorptive epithelium
[1]. They show lowish amino acid sequence identity (~58%); nevertheless,
they have rather similar hydropathy profiles, with hydrophilic N- and C-
termini, flanking a central hydrophobic domain. Their N-termini show 
considerable variation, unlike the central domain (containing the 12 
putative transmembrane (TM) domains) and their C-termini, which are well
conserved (~70%). Both isoforms are known to be glycosylated and, consistent
with this, consensus sites for N-linked glycosylation are located within the
large hydrophilic loop between presumed TM domains 7 and 8. Sequence
comparisons with other cloned ion co-transporters reveals that Na-K-Cl
co-transporters belong to a superfamily of electroneutral cation-chloride
co-transporters, which includes the K-Cl co-transporter (PR01081) and the
thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl co-transporter. All share a similar predicted
membrane topology of 12 TM regions in a central hydrophobic domain,
together with hydrophilic N- and C-termini that are likely cytoplasmic.

Mutations in the gene encoding the renal-specific isoform of the Na-K-Cl
co-transporter (NKCC2) give rise to Bartter's Syndrome Type 1, an inherited 
kidney disease characterised by hypokalaemia, metabolic alkalosis, salt-
wasting and hypotension [2].

NKCC2 (also called BSC1) is an apical absorptive Na-K-Cl co-transporter
isoform. In contrast to the wide tissue distribution of NKCC1, expression
of the NKCC2 isoform is restricted to the vertebrate kidney, where it is
involved in urinary concentration [3]. Subsequent studies revealed that
three variants exist, differing by 31 amino acids, which are generated
by alternatively splicing. They show differential distributions within
the kidney, suggesting they may subserve varying functions [4]. NKCC2
consists of 1099 amino acid residues (human isoform) and, as mentioned
above, has been found to be responsible for a heritable kidney disorder,
Bartter's syndrome type 1, an autosomal recessive disorder. To date, at
least six different mutations have been found that result in loss of
NKCC2 function; this markedly reduces salt reabsorption by the thick
ascending limb of Henle's loop, thereby leading to salt wasting, hypo-
volaemia, and hypotension [2].

NAKCLTRSPRT2 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Na-K-Cl co-transporter type 2 isoform. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions within the first ~2/3 of the alignment, focusing on those sections
that characterise the Na-K-Cl co-transporter type 2 isoform but distinguish
it from others - motifs 1-3 reside within the presumed cytoplasmic
N-terminus; and motifs 4-6 encode portions of the second, fourth and fifth
presumed extracellular domains, respectively. Two iterations on SPTR37_9f 
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5
sequences was identified.
