MACSCAVRCPTR
The egg peptide speract receptor is a transmembrane glycoprotein of about
500 amino acids [1]. Topologically, it comprises a large extracellular
domain of about 450 residues, followed by a transmembrane domain and a
short cytoplasmic region of about 12 amino acids. The extracellular
domain contains 4 repeats of a well-conserved region, which spans 115
amino acids and contains 6 conserved cysteines. A similar domain is also
found towards the C-terminus of macrophage scavenger receptor type I [2],
a membrane glycoprotein implicated in the pathologic deposition of
cholesterol in arterial walls during artherogenesis, and in the CD5
glycoprotein, which acts as a receptor in regulating T-cell proliferation.

The type I and type II human scavenger receptors are similar to their  
bovine, lapine and murine counterparts. They consist of 6 domains:
cytoplasmic (I); membrane-spanning (II); spacer (III); alpha-helical coiled-
coil (IV); collagen-like (V); and a type-specific C-terminal (VI) [3]. 
Immunohistochemical studies have indicated the presence of scavenger
receptors in the macrophages of lipid-rich atherosclerotic lesions,
suggesting the involvement of these receptors in atherogenesis [3]. 

The macrophage scavenger receptor is trimeric and has unusual ligand-binding
properties [4]. The trimeric structure of the bovine type I scavenger 
receptor contains 3 extracellular C-terminal cysteine-rich domains connected
to the transmembrane domain by a long fibrous stalk. The stalk structure,
which consists of an alpha-helical coiled coil and a collagen-like triple
helix, has not previously been observed in an integral membrane protein [4]. 

MACSCAVRCPTR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
macrophage scavenger receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the macrophage scavenger receptors but distuinguish them
from the speract receptor family - motif 1 lies in the cytoplasmic domain; 
motif 2 includes the transmembrane domain; and motifs 3-8 span the alpha-
helical coiled-coil domain. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was
identified. 
