5HT6RECEPTR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

5-Hydroxytryptamine (or serotonin) is ubiquitous in plants and animals.
It is an important neurotransmitter and local hormone in the CNS and
instestine, and is implicated in a vast array of physiological and patho-
physiological pathways [6]. In the periphery, 5HT contracts a number of
smooth muscles, and induces endothelium-dependent vasodilation through
the formation of NO [6]. It is a mediator of peristalsis, and may be
involved in platelet aggregation and homeostasis. In the CNS, 5HT is
believed to be involved in a wide range of functions, including the
control of appetite, mood, anxiety, hallucinations, sleep, vomiting and
pain perception [6]. 5HT receptor ligands are of clinical use in the
treatment of depression, migraine and post-operative vomiting.

Numerous receptor subtypes have been classified according to their
antagonist susceptibilities and their affinities for 5HT. Five 5HT1
subtypes and at least three 5HT2 subtypes have now been identified, in
addition to subtypes 5HT3-7 [6]. All share a high degree of sequence
similarity, and have overlapping pharmacological specificities.

The human 5-HT6 receptor is positively coupled to adenylyl cyclase and has
pharmacological properties similar to the rat receptor, with high affinity
for several typical and atypical antipsychotics, including clozapine [7].
The receptor is expressed in several human brain regions, most prominently
in the caudate nucleus [7]. The gene for the receptor maps to human
chromosome region 1p35-p36, overlapping that established for the 5-HT1D
alpha receptor, suggesting that they may be closely linked [7].

5HT6RECEPTR is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
5HT6 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the 
5HT6 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the 5HT family - motifs
1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus, leading into TM domain 1; motif 3 spans 
the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 resides in the first external loop; 
motif 5 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 6 and 7 span the second 
external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motif 8 spans the C-terminal 
portion of TM domain 5, leading into the third cytoplasmic loop; motifs 9
and 10 lie in the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 11 spans the third external
loop; and motifs 12 and 13 reside at the C-terminus. Two iterations on 
SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 3 sequences was identified.  
