APOLIPOPROTD
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The 
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Apolipoprotein D (apoD) is a mammalian plasma lipoprotein first isolated
in 1973 [5]. Although well characterised, its precise biological function 
remains unclear. It has long been known that the majority of apoD 
constitutes a minor but significant protein component of high density 
lipoprotein particles (HDLs), representing about 5% of total HDL protein,
and that its interaction with other apolipoproteins is of considerable
importance [6,7].

By contrast with most apolipoproteins, human apoD is relatively small:
sequencing studies [8] have indicated a translation product of 189 residues
with a calculated MW of approximately 18500. ApoD is 18% glycosylated, at
either or both of two asparagines (positions 65 and 98 [8]), giving an 
overall MW of 29,000-32,000 [7,9]. Isoelectric focusing of human apoD shows
3 bands with pI 5.20, 5.08 and 5.00, with a minor band at pI 4.7 [7]. By 
contrast, rat apoD shows a heterogeneous pI in the range 4.05 to 4.37 [10].

Human apoD is distributed widely: its mRNA has been detected in a number of
tissues, including kidney, liver, pancreas, spleen, intestine, placenta, 
adrenal gland and foetal brain tissue [11]. The tissue distribution in the 
rat resembles that of human apoD, except that its plasma concentration is 
low [12]. More recently, the large scale expression of apoD has been 
identified in regenerating peripheral nerve tissue [10,13]. 

There is some evidence that the expression of apoD is regulated by steroid
hormones [14]. The tissue distribution of apoD is quite different from that
of other apolipoproteins; only the liver and intestines are significant 
shared sites of synthesis. ApoD is found in a number of mammalian species, 
including humans and other primates (such as baboons, rhesus and cynomalgas 
monkeys), rats, rabbits and goat, but it is absent from pig, dog, cow and
horse.

The complete sequences of human, rat and rabbit apoD have been determined
[8,13,15]: the gene sequences are of similar length and are well conserved.
Analysis of the human sequence revealed that apoD is a lipocalin family 
member showing the greatest apparent similarity to insect colourant proteins.
The expected 8-membered beta-barrel structure of ApoD contrasts with the 
structure of other apoliproteins. Apoliprotein A is a modular protein known
to be composed of several kringle domains, whilst crystallographic studies
of apolipoprotein E and apophorin E show them to be helix bundles. Member-
ship of the lipocalin family suggests apoD may function by binding a
hydrophobic ligand; the nature of this molecule remains uncertain, although
cholesterol, bilin, progesterone and pregnenolone have all been suggested.

Almost all apoD in plasma is found as part of a supramolecular complex. It 
is localised primarily in an HDL, with most of the remainder in very high 
density lipoprotein (VHDL) particles, and only trace amounts in low density 
lipoprotein (LDL) and very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) particles. The
nature of these complexes has been the subject of some study. Using 
monoclonal antibodies raised against isolated apoD, Weech et al. [8] 
examined the antigenic structure of apoD: their results indicate that the
protein contains two distinct antigenic sites. However, extending their 
analysis to other HDL components indicates that these antigenic sites are 
apparently shared by other, higher molecular weight plasma proteins. These 
interesting, yet anomalous, results find an explanation in the later work.
Making use of monoclonal antibodies raised against isolated apoD, which do
not cross react against purified apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein A-II or 
apolipoprotein E, the immunoreactivity of proteins isolated from HDL 
particles has been studied. Under non-reducing conditions, they identify a
number of cross-reactive proteins with MW that range from 28000 to 65000.
In the presence of beta-mercaptoethanol, they find only a 28000 molecular 
weight species. This suggests that the immunoreactive properties of higher
molecular species results from a number of complexes that apoD makes with
other plasma proteins through the formation of one or more inter-molecular
disulphides.

Fielding and Fielding [6] used immunoadsorption chromatography to define the 
structure of lipoprotein complexes containing apoD and lecithin:cholesterol 
transferase (LCAT), a plasma enzyme that converts free cholesterol into its
esterified form. Their results indicated that all LCAT was present as a 
complex with apolipoprotein A-1 (apo A-1) and apoD, with an apparent
stoichiometry of 1:1:2. However, they found about 80% of all apoD formed 
part of a macromolecular complex with apo A-1 and apolipoprotein A-2 (apo 
A-2) with a stoichiometry of 3:2:1, but this complex contains little LCAT.
The studies of Francone et al. [16] show that CETP is also a component of
the LCAT complex and that this comprises only 30% of total LCAT and about
0.2% of apoA-I. They propose that this complex fulfils a major role in the
metabolism of a substantial portion of cell-derived cholesterol and may be
required for the transport of cholesterol from cell membranes to the plasma.

APOLIPOPROTD is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
apolipoprotein D. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes the first beta-strand;
motif 2 includes strand 6; motif 3 encodes strand 9; and motif 4 includes 
helix 4 and strand 10. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR57.15_40.15f identified a true set of 21 sequences. Six
partial matches were also found, all of which are translated genomic
sequences that fail to match one or more motifs.
