CYCOXIDASEI
Haem-copper respiratory oxidases are oligomeric integral membrane protein
complexes that catalyse the terminal step in the respiratory chain [1]: they
transfer electrons from cytochrome c or a quinol to oxygen. In prokaryotes,
terminal oxidases generate a transmembrane (TM) proton gradient across the 
plasma membrane, and, in eukaryotes, the mitochondrial inner membrane. The
enzyme complex consists of 3-4 subunits in prokaryotes and up to 13
polypeptides in mammals. Only the catalytic subunit (equivalent to mammalian
subunit 1 (CO I)) is found in all haem-copper respiratory oxidases. A
bimetallic centre (formed by a high-spin haem and copper B) and a low-spin
haem, both ligated to six conserved histidine residues near the outer side
of four TM regions within CO I, is common to all family members [2-4].

By contrast with eukaryotes, the respiratory chain of prokaryotes is
branched to multiple terminal oxidases. The enzyme complexes vary in haem
and copper composition, substrate type and substrate affinity. The different 
respiratory oxidases allow the cells to customise their respiratory systems 
according a variety of environmental growth conditions [1].

CYCOXIDASEI is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
cytochrome C oxidase subunit I. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 20 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motif 2 includes a conserved histidine,
which may be a haem ligand; motifs 8 and 9 span the region encoded by 
PROSITE pattern COX1 (PS00077), which encompasses the copper-binding region
(the conserved histidines are copper B ligands); and motif 12 includes two
conserved histidines, which may be haem ligands. Six iterations on 
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 179 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also 
found, all of which are cytochrome C oxidase subunit I sequences that fail 
to make significant matches with one or more motifs.
