PRESENILNSEL 
Presenilins are polytopic transmembrane (TM) proteins, mutations in which 
are associated with the occurrence of early-onset familial Alzheimer's 
disease, a rare form of the disease that results from a single-gene
mutation [1]. While the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease is unresolved, all 
forms are typified by a global cognitive decline and the occurrence of  
characteristic neuropathological changes. Invariably, post-mortem brains
from Alzheimer's patients contain abundant neurofibrillary tangles, together
with depositions of beta-amyloid protein as senile plaques.

The physiological functions of presenilins are unknown, but they may be 
related to developmental signalling, apoptotic signal transduction, or
processing of selected proteins, such as the beta-amyloid precursor protein
(beta-APP). That presenilin homologues have been identified in species that
do not have an Alzhemier's disease correlate suggests that they may have 
functions unrelated to the disease, homologues having been identified in
mouse, Drosophila and C.elegans. 

In humans, there are two presenilin genes (PS1 and PS2), encoding proteins
of 467 and 448 amino acids respectively. They share 67% amino acid identity,
the greatest divergence between the two falling in the N-terminus and in the
large hydrophilic loop towards the C-terminal part of each molecule. Six to
nine TM domains are predicted for each, and biochemical analysis has
demonstrated that their C-termini are cytoplasmic; but the orientation of
their N-termini and large hydrophilic loops remains to be resolved. They
are expressed in almost all tissues, including the brain and, at a cellular
level, they have been localised to the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic
reticulum and Golgi apparatus. 

Sel-12, a worm homologue of the mammalian presenilins (with which it shares
~50% amino acid identity), has been shown to facilitate the function of the
Notch receptor (LIN-12 protein), which plays a role in cell-cell signalling
during cell differentiation in development. Intriguingly, presenilin 1 is
able to restore function in a C.elegans mutant lacking sel-12, suggesting
presenilin may also be involved in cell-cell signalling in higher species [2].
 
PRESENILNSEL is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
C.elegans presenilin homologue, sel-12, and related C.elegans proteins. The
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs
were drawn from conserved regions spanning ~two thirds of the alignment, 
focusing on those sections that characterise sel-12 but distinguish it 
from other presenilin isoforms - motif 1 encodes ~half the N-terminal
hydrophilic region; and motifs 3-4 reside within the hydrophilic region 
between putative TM domains 7 and 8. A single iteration on OWL31.1 was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences.
