KCLTRNSPORT1
The K-Cl co-transporter (KCC) mediates the coupled movement of K+ and Cl- 
ions across the plasma membrane of many animal cells. This transport is
involved in the regulatory volume decrease in response to cell swelling in
red blood cells, and has been proposed to play a role in the vectorial
movement of Cl- across kidney epithelia. The transport process involves one
for one electroneutral movement of K+ together with Cl-, and, in all
known mammalian cells, the net movement is outward [1].

In neurones, it appears to play a unique role in maintaining low intra-
cellular Cl-concentration, which is required for the functioning of Cl- 
dependent fast synaptic inhibition, mediated by certain neurotransmitters,
such as gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine.

Two isoforms of the K-Cl co-transporter have been described, termed KCC1 and
KCC2, containing 1085 and 1116 amino acids, respectively. They are both 
predicted to have 12 transmembrane (TM) regions in a central hydrophobic 
domain, together with hydrophilic N- and C-termini that are likely
cytoplasmic. Comparison of their sequences with those of other ion-
tranporting membrane proteins reveals that they are part of a new super-
family of cation-chloride co-transporters, which includes the Na-Cl and 
Na-K-2Cl co-transporters. KCC1 is widely expressed in human tissues, while
KCC2 is expressed only in brain neurones, making it likely that this is the
isoform responsible for maintaining low Cl- concentration in neurones [2,3].

KCC1 is widely expressed in human tissues, and when heterologously expressed,
possesses the functional characteristics of the well-studied red blood cell
K-Cl co-transporter, including stimulation by both swelling and
N-ethylmaleimide. Several splice variants have also been identified.

KCLTRNSPORT1 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
K-Cl co-transporter type 1 isoform. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those 
sections that characterise the K-Cl co-transporter type 1 isoform but
distinguish it from type 2 - motifs 1 and 2 lie within the putative
cytoplasmic N-terminus; and motifs 3 and 4 lie near the extremity of the
presumed cytoplasmic, C-terminal hydrophilic domain. Two iterations on
OWL31.1 were required to reach converegence, at which point a true set
comprising 7 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
