WNT2PROTEIN
Wnt proteins constitute a large family of secreted molecules that are
involved in intercellular signalling during development. The name derives
from the first 2 members of the family to be discovered: int-1 (mouse) and
wingless (Drosophila) [1]. It is now recognised that Wnt signalling controls
many cell fate decisions in a variety of different organisms, including
mammals [2]. Wnt signalling has been implicated in tumorigenesis, early
mesodermal patterning of the embryo, morphogenesis of the brain and kidneys,
regulation of mammary gland proliferation and Alzheimer's disease [3,4].

Wnt-mediated signalling is believed to proceed initially through binding to
cell surface receptors of the frizzled family; the signal is subsequently
transduced through several cytoplasmic components to B-catenin, which enters
the nucleus and activates the transcription of several genes important in
development [5]. More recently, however, several non-canonical Wnt
signalling pathways have been elucidated that act independently of
B-catenin [6]. Members of the Wnt gene family are defined by their sequence
similarity to mouse Wnt-1 and Wingless in Drosophila. They encode proteins
of ~350-400 residues in length, with orthologues identified in several,
mostly vertebrate, species. Very little is known about the structure of 
Wnts as they are notoriously insoluble; in terms of primary structure, the
family is characterised by a signal sequence and an almost invariant pattern
of 23-24 conserved cysteines [1]. Fifteen major Wnt gene families have been 
identified in vertebrates, with multiple subtypes within some classes.

The Wnt-2 gene was isolated from a human lung cDNA library in 1988 [7]. The 
protein was initially named IRP for Int-1 Related Protein and later termed 
Wnt-2. Northern blot analysis from a range of embryonic and adult tissues 
revealed that the gene was expressed almost exclusively in placenta and lung.
Mutation of the mouse Wnt-2 gene leads to placental defects.

WNT2PROTEIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for Wnt-2
proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the N-
terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that characterise
Wnt-2 proteins but distinguish them from related Wnt subtypes - motif 1 
includes the first conserved cysteine; and motif 3 lies in the central 
portion of the protein. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9 sequences was identified.
