GAMMATUBULIN
Microtubules are polymers of tubulin, a dimer of two 55kDa subunits, 
designated alpha and beta [1,2]. Within the microtubule lattice, alpha-beta
heterodimers associate in a head-to-tail fashion, giving rise to microtubule 
polarity. Fluorescent labelling studies have suggested that tubulin is
oriented in microtubules with beta-tubulin toward the plus end [3]. 

For maximal rate and extent of polymerisation into microtubules, tubulin 
requires GTP. Two molecules of GTP are bound at different sites, termed N 
and E. At the E (Exchangeable) site, GTP is hydrolysed during incorporation
into the microtubule. Close to the E site is an invariant region rich in 
glycine residues, which is found in both chains and is thought to control
access of the nucleotide to its binding site [4]. 

Most species, excepting simple eukaryotes, express a variety of closely-
related alpha- and beta-isotypes. A third family member, gamma-tubulin, has
also been identified in a number of species [5,6]. 

Gamma-tubulins constitute a ubiquitous and highly-conserved subfamily of 
the tubulin family. The protein is found at microtubule-organising centres, 
such as the spindle poles or the centrosome. It remains associated with the 
centrosome when microtubules are depolymerised, suggesting that it is 
an integral component that might play a role in minus-end nucleation of 
microtubule assembly [5,6]. 

GAMMATUBULIN is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for gamma-
tubulins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 15
sequences. The motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the 
gamma-tubulins but distinguish them from the rest of the tubulin family.
Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 32 sequences was identified. Several partial 
matches were also found, most of which are gamma-tubulins that fail to make
significant matches with one or more motifs, and two are beta-tubulins that
match two motifs.
