DNABINDINGHU
Nucleoid histone or histone-like DNA-binding proteins are found throughout 
both the eukaryotic and prokaryotic kingdoms. The main function of these 
moieties is to organise the host DNA and to control the expression of genes  
contained therein [1]. In bacteria, the histone-like family of proteins 
includes HU, H-NS, and the integration host factors (IHFs). Although not 
sequentially similar to eukaryotic histone proteins, the bacterial versions 
carry out the same process of introducing negative supercoiling into relaxed 
chromosomal DNA in the presence of topoisomerase I [1], and are named 
accordingly.

Intracellular levels of the different DNA-binding proteins change during 
bacterial cell growth, IHF increasing during stationary phase, and HU
increasing as exponential growth is achieved [2]. A study to determine the 
elasticity of host DNA bound to Escherichia coli IHF has shown that the 
protein plays a part in non-specific binding of nucleic acids, compacting 
the chromosome during stationary growth phase [2]. E.coli mutants lacking 
the HU gene exhibit a highly altered outer membrane structure that is 
extremely sensitive to detergents and antibiotics [3]. It is believed 
therefore that these histone-like proteins are essential for the survival
of pathogenic and commensal microbes inside the human host [3].

In several streptococcal species, the IHF and HU genes also play a 
role in virulence. A HU-homologue, termed Histone-Like Protein A (HlpA)
can bind specifically to heparan sulphate in the proteoglycan basement layers 
of host heart and kidney tissues [4]. Upon pathogen cell lysis at the site 
of infection, the released HlpA forms complexes with soluble lipoteichoic 
acid (LTA) from the ruptured bacterial cell membranes. These complexes form 
potent nephritotoxins, elicit a strong IL-1 and TNF-alpha response, and are 
connected with acute post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis and rheumatic 
fever [5].

The structure of the histone-like protein HU from Bacillus stearothermophilus
has been determined by NMR. The protein exists as a dimer, with a combined
molecular mass of 19.5kDa [6]. Two "beta-arms" function as the non-specific 
binding site for bacterial DNA. 

DNABINDINGHU is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the prokaryotic integration host factor family. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment (~50 
amino acids) - motif 1 spans beta-strand 1; motif 2 encodes strands 2 and 3; 
and motif 3 encompasses strand 4 and alpha-helix 3. Two iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 109 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are prokaryotic histone-like proteins that fail to
match one of the motifs. 
