PROTEASEAR4
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Thrombin is a coagulation protease that activates platelets, leukocytes, 
endothelial and mesenchymal cells at sites of vascular injury, acting partly
through an unusual proteolytically activated GPCR [6]. Gene knockout 
experiments have provided definitive evidence for a second thrombin receptor
in mouse platelets and have suggested tissue-specific roles for different
thrombin receptors. Because the physiological agonist at the receptor was
originally unknown, it was provisionally named protease-activated receptor
(PAR) [7]. At least 4 PAR subtypes have now been characterised. Thus, the 
thrombin and PAR receptors constitute a fledgling receptor family that 
shares a novel proteolytic activation mechanism [8].

The human thrombin receptor, designated protease-activated receptor 4 (PAR4),
has been cloned and characterised [9]. Northern blot analysis showed that
PAR4 mRNA was expressed in a number of tissues, high levels being present
in lung, pancreas, thyroid, testis and small intestine [9]. Using
fluorescence in situ hybridisation, the human PAR4 gene has been mapped
to chromosome 19p12 [6]. 

PROTEASEAR4 is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
protease activated receptor 4. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the PAR 4 receptor but distinguish it from closely related
members of the PAR family - motifs 1-4 reside at the N-terminus; motif
5 encompasses the first cytoplasmic loop and part of the TM domains to its
N- and C-termini; motif 6 encodes the central portion of TM domain 3; motifs
7 and 8 span the second external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motif 9
spans the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 10 encodes part of the third 
external loop, leading into TM domain 7; and motif 11 resides at the 
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
