ERGCHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].

Structurally, EAG channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-gated
K+ channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and 3 kinds of
Ca2+-activated K+ channel (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+ channels share a
characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif that resides between the
2 C-terminal membrane-spanning helices, and forms the K+-selective pore 
domain [1]. However, unlike other families within this structural class,
EAG channels possess a cyclic nucleotide binding domain within their 
putative intracellular C-termini.

The first EAG K+ channel was identified in Drosophila, following a screen 
for mutations giving rise to behavioural abnormalities. Disruption of the
Eag gene caused an ether-induced, leg-shaking behaviour. Subsequent studies
have revealed a conserved multi-gene family of EAG-like K+ channels, which
are present in Homo sapiens and many other species. Based on the varying
functional properties of the channels, the family has been divided into
3 subfamilies: EAG, ELK and ERG. Interestingly, C.elegans appears to lack
the ELK type [3].

The human ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG), cloned from hippocampus, shares
49% amino acid identity with EAG. It is also found in the heart, where it 
helps to control K+ efflux [4]. Mutations in HERG result in the disruption
of the repolarising current and the disease LQT2 syndrome, an inherited
disorder of cardiac repolarisation that predisposes affected individuals to
life-threatening arrhythmias [5,6].

ERGKCHANNEL is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the ERG
potassium channel family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that
characterise the ERG channels but distinguish them from other members of the
K+ channel superfamily - motif 1 spans the loop between TM domains 1 and 2;
motifs 2, 3 and 4 are situated in the C-terminus; and motif 5 spans the 
cyclic nucleotide binding domain. Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 14 
sequences was identified.
