EPICPROTEIN
The LanC-like protein superfamily encompasses a highly divergent group of
peptide-modifying enzymes, including the eukaryotic and bacterial 
lanthionine synthetase C-like proteins (LanC) [1-3]; subtilin biosynthesis
protein SpaC from Bacillus subtilis [4,5]; epidermin biosynthesis protein
EpiC from Staphylococcus epidermidis [6]; nisin biosynthesis protein NisC 
from Lactoccocus lactis [7-9]; GCR2 from Arabidopsis thaliana [10]; and
many others.  

The 3D structure of the lantibiotic cyclase from L.lactis has been
determined by X-ray crystallography to 2.5A resolution [11]. The globular
structure is characterised by an all-alpha fold, in which an outer ring
of helices envelops an inner toroid composed of 7 shorter, hydrophobic 
helices. This 7-fold hydrophobic periodicity has led several authors to 
claim various members of the family, including eukaryotic LanC-1 and GCR2,
to be novel G protein-coupled receptors [10,12]; some of these claims have
since been corrected [2,13,14].

The EpiC protein from S.epidermidis, a hydrophobic but nevertheless soluble
protein, is involved in the biosynthesis of the lantibiotic epidermin [6,15].
Its molecular structure is stabilised by a number of intramolecular 
disulphide bridges; the cysteine residues within its WCYG and CHG motifs,
highly conserved in LanC-like proteins [15], lie on 2 of the inner helices.

EPICPROTEIN is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
epidermin biosynthesis protein EpiC. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the EpiC proteins but distinguish them from
closely related members of the LanC-like protein superfamily. A single 
iteration on SPTR55_38f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Six partial matches 
were also found, all of which are members of the LanC-like superfamily that
fail to make significant matches with one or more motifs.
