SIBAPROTEIN
At present, Streptococci are amongst the most medically important bacterial
species, causing a variety of diseases across a wide range of age groups 
[1]. They are non-motile, Gram-positive cocci that are facultative or 
obligate anaerobes, and occur in pairs or chains [1]. These microbes can be
separated into groups according to their serological specificity, group A 
streptococci (GAS) being amongst the most virulent and showing the most
antibiotic resistance [1]. 

To combat the sudden surge of infections caused by GAS, namely S.pyogenes 
and S.pneumoniae, researchers have turned to the wealth of information 
contained within streptococcal genomes as a source of novel drug and vaccine
targets [2]. This, coupled with other techniques, such as microarray
analysis and comparative genomics, are providing insights into the
variations between clinical strains and avirulent commensal bacteria [2]. 
Virulence factors, like the well-characterised glucan-binding protein from
S.mutans are useful in assigning function to novel ORFs in new genomes [3].

An example of this approach is the recent discovery of the SibA secreted
protein of S.pyogenes, an immunoglobulin binding moiety that is completely
different from the classical Ig-binding M protein of other GAS isolates [4].
It shows similarity to other GAS glucan-binding proteins and secreted 
antigens, suggesting a common ancestor [4]. Deletional studies in vitro 
showed that it is essential for virulence, and has several homologues in 
other Gram-positive pathogens [4].

SIBAPROTEIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Streptococcal non-M secreted SibA protein family. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment. Two 
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were
also found: Q93RG6 is Streptococcus intermedius hypothetical protein that
fails to match motif 1; and Q99VV6 is a Staphylococcus aureus secretory 
antigen SSAA homologue that matches motifs 2 and 3.
