NUCFACTORATC
Antigenic stimulation of T lymphocytes initiates a complex series of 
intracellular signal transduction pathways that leads to the expression of a 
panel of immunoregulatory genes, whose function is critical to the 
initiation and coordination of the immune response. The multi-subunit 
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) transcription factor family 
plays a pivotal role in this process and is involved in the expression of a 
number of immunologically important genes. These include the cytokines IL-2, 
IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and 
tumour necrosis factor-alpha, as well as several cell-surface molecules, 
such as CD40L and FasL. Although originally described in T cells, it is now 
apparent that NFAT proteins are also expressed in other immune system cells,
including B cells, mast cells, basophils and natural killer cells, as well 
as in a variety of non-immune cell types and tissues, such as skeletal 
muscle, neurons, heart and adipocytes. However, although NFAT acts as a 
calcium-dependent transcription factor and serves to couple gene expression 
to changes in intracellular calcium levels in most cases, NFAT target genes 
have not been identified in these latter cell types [1-5].

NFAT proteins appear to be regulated primarily at the level of their  
subcellular localisation. They are found exclusively in the cytoplasm of 
resting T cells, and consist of 2 components: a pre-existing cytoplasmic 
component that translocates into the nucleus on calcium mobilisation, and an 
inducible nuclear component comprising members of the activating protein-1 
(AP-1) family of transcription factors. In response to antigen receptor 
signalling, the calcium-regulated phosphatase calcineurin acts directly to 
dephosphorylate NFAT proteins, causing their rapid translocation from the 
cytoplasm to the nucleus, where they cooperatively bind their target 
sequences together with AP-1 proteins, thereby initiating transcription. 
It is now apparent that regulation of NFAT subcellular localisation is a 
highly dynamic process, which greatly depends on quantitative changes in 
intracellular calcium concentration. The calcineurin-mediated 
dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation of NFAT proteins are 
counteracted by poorly defined NFAT kinase(s), which phosphorylate the 
proteins, thereby either antagonising their nuclear translocation or
promoting their export from the nucleus back to the cytoplasm. Thus, in the 
absence of sustained calcineurin activity, nuclear NFAT proteins are rapidly 
rephosphorylated and exported back into the cytoplasm [3,5].

The NFAT family of transcription factors contains 4 members: NFAT1 (NFATp),
NFAT2 (NFATc), NFAT3 and NFAT4 (NFATx), each expressed as several isoforms 
related by alternative splicing. These proteins share a highly conserved 
DNA-binding domain of ~270 amino acids. This domain, which is related to  
that of the Rel family of transcription factors, is required for cooperative 
interactions with AP-1 proteins, and contains one of 2 redundant nuclear 
localisation sequences (NLSs). Upstream of this region is a less well 
conserved regulatory domain of ~300 amino acids, characterised by the 
presence of repeated motifs rich in serine and proline residues 
(SPXXSPXXSPXXXXXX[D/E][D/E]). The N-terminal domain is both necessary and 
sufficient to confer calcinuerin-dependent nuclear localisation and 
recycling: it contains binding sites for calcineurin, as well as a second 
redundant NLS and a sequence motif involved in directing the nuclear export 
of NFAT proteins. Most, if not all, of the sites of regulatory 
phosphorylation are found within this domain. It has been proposed that the 
phophorylation status of these sites modifies the activity of the two 
redundant NFAT NLSs and so determines the subcellular distribution of NFAT 
proteins. By contrast, little is known about the C-terminal domain, which 
shares no significant sequence similarities with other proteins, and is 
absent in NFATc [2,3,5].

An additional member of the NFAT family, NFAT5, has a constitutive nuclear 
localisation that is not modified on cellular activation, implying that it 
is a target of signalling pathways distinct from those that regulate NFAT1-
4, and that it is likely to modulate cellular processes in a wide variety of 
cells [4].

The calcineurin dependence of NFAT proteins makes them targets of the 
immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin A (CsA) and FK506. These powerful agents
have not only contributed in a major way to the success of transplant 
surgery, but may also prove important in the treatment of cardiac 
hypertrophy (where NFAT3 is specifically implicated) [4].

NUCFACTORATC is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
NFAT proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions largely spanning 
the central portion of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise the NFAT1-4 proteins but distinguish them from the rest of the 
Rel-domain containing proteins (rel/Dorsal/NFkB) - motifs 1 and 2 span the 
DNA-binding domain. Two iterations on SPTR39_17f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11 sequences was 
identified.
