TATCFAMILY
Translocation of proteins across the two membranes of Gram-negative bacteria
can be effected via a number of routes. Most proteins marked for export
carry a secretion signal at their N-terminus, and are secreted by the
general secretory pathway; the signal peptide is cleaved as they pass
through the outer membrane. Other secretion systems include the type III
system found in a select group of Gram-negative plant and animal pathogens,
and the CagA system of Helicobacter pylori [1].

In some bacterial species, however, there exists a system that operates
independently of the Sec pathway [2]. It selectively translocates
periplasmic-bound molecules that are synthesised with, or are in close
association with, "partner" proteins bearing an (S/T)RRXFLK twin arginine
motif at the N-terminus. The pathway is thus termed the Twin-Arginine
Translocation (TAT) system. Surprisingly, the four elements that comprise
the TAT system are structurally and mechanistically related to a
pH-dependent import system in plant chloroplast thylakoid membranes [2]. The
gene products responsible for the Sec-independent pathway are TatA, TatB,
TatC and TatE. TatB is essential for the secretion of these specific
proteins, and forms a scaffold upon which TatC assembles in the membrane
[4]. TatC itself is essential for the final stage of protein translocation,
and TatC- mutants are unable to secrete a number of important proteins [4].

The predicted structure of TatC, based on sequence analyis, has six
transmembrane (TM) helices arranged such that the N- and C-termini of the
polypeptide chain are located at the cytoplasmic side of the membrane
[1]. In addition to being found in bacterial genomes, TatC homologues are
also encoded by certain plastid genomes, where they are involved in the 
thylakoid pH-dependent protein import system. They are also encoded in the
mitochodrial genomes of algae, higher plants and some protists.

TATCFAMILY is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial Sec-independent translocation TatC protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 16 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motifs
1-3 encode the N-termini of putative TM domains 1, 3 and 4, respectively; 
and motif 4 spans TM domain 5. Three iterations on SPTR40_20f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 53 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are family
members that fail to make significant matches with one or more motifs. 
