TNFACTORR8
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 8 (also known as CD30 and Ki-1 antigen) was originally
described as a marker of Hodgkin's and Reed-Sternberg cells in Hodgkin's
lymphoma. Expression of the receptor is largely restricted to virus-infected
lymphocytes, neoplasms of lymphoid origin and a subset of activated T cells
that produce Th2-type cytokines [7]. The receptor has pleiotropic biological 
functions, including inducement apoptosis and enhancement of cell survival
[8].

TNFACTORR8 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 8. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise TNF receptor 8 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motif 1 resides within the extracellular N-terminal region; motif
2 partially spans the extracellular N-terminal region and the transmembrane
domain; and motifs 3 and 4 lie within the intracellular C-terminal region.
Two iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified. Two partial matches
were also found, A8MSI2_HUMAN and Q6P4D9_HUMAN, which are human TNF receptor
8 sequences that fail to match motifs 1 and 2, and 3 and 4, respectively.
