BDNFACTOR
During the development of the vertebrate nervous system, many neurons
become redundant (because they have died, failed to connect to target
cells, etc.) and are eliminated. At the same time, developing neurons send
out axon outgrowths that contact their target cells [1]. Such cells control
their degree of innervation (the number of axon connections) by the
secretion of various specific neurotrophic factors that are essential for
neuron survival. One of these is nerve growth factor (NGF), which is
involved in the survival of some classes of embryonic neuron (e.g., peri-
pheral sympathetic neurons) [1]. NGF is mostly found outside the central
nervous system (CNS), but slight traces have been detected in adult CNS
tissues, although a physiological role for this is unknown [1]; it has also
been found in several snake venoms [2,3]. Proteins similar to NGF include
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophins 3 to 7, all of
which demonstrate neuron survival and outgrowth activities.

Originally purified from pig brain [4], the neurotrophin BDNF is expressed 
in a range of tissues and cell types in the CNS and periphery. It exerts
its effects by binding to neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 2 
(NTRK2; also called TrkB) and the low affinity nerve growth factor receptor, 
p75NTR. While the former receptor mediates the neurotrophin's prosurvival 
functions, activation of p75NTR by BDNF has been shown to promote apoptosis
and to inhibit axonal growth [5].

BDNF is a key regulator of synaptic plasticity, and plays an important role
in learning and memory [6]. Several lines of evidence suggest that it is 
also involved in the control of food intake and body weight [7]. A number 
of clinical studies have demonstrated an association between aberrant BDNF
levels and disorders and disease states, such as depression, epilepsy, 
bipolar disorder, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease [8].

BDNFACTOR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for brain-
derived neurotrophic factor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 33 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes part of the
signal sequence. Three iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 47 sequences was 
identified. A single partial match was also found, Q6YNR1_HUMAN, a human
BDNF splice variant that fails to match motifs 4 and 5.
