TOPISMRASEII
Topoisomerases catalyse the interconversion of topological isomers of DNA
and play a key role in DNA metabolism [1]. Topoisomerase I catalyses an ATP-
independent reaction, while topoisomerase II catalyses an ATP-dependent
reaction, resulting in the formation of DNA supercoils [1-3]. The supercoil
is formed by transient cleavage in both strands of double-stranded DNA,
followed by the passage of a segment of DNA through the break, and break
ligation [3]. Eukaryotic enzymes can form both positive and negative
supercoils, while prokaryotic enzymes form only negative supercoils.

Eukaryotic topoisomerase II exists as a homodimer; in bacteriophage T4 it 
consists of 3 heterologous subunits; in prokaryotes it exists as a tetramer
of 2 subunits (2 each of gyrA and gyrB); and in E.coli, a second type II
topoisomerase, involved in chromosome segregation (topoisomerase IV),
consists of 2 subunits (parC and parE). GyrB, parE, and the product of 
bacteriophage T4 gene 39, are all similar to the eukaryotic proteins [1-3].

Human cells express two distinct type II topoisomerase isozymes, designated
topoisomerase II alpha (170kDa form) and topoisomerase II beta (180kDa form)
[4]. The predicted topoisomerase II beta protein sequence shares a high
level of similarity (72% identical residues) to that of the human alpha
isozyme, and is similar to topoisomerase II from Drosophila, yeast and
bacteria. Regions of greatest sequence divergence lie at the extreme 
N-terminus and over a C-terminal domain comprising approximately 25% of the
total protein [4]. 

The crystal structure of a fragment of yeast topoisomerase II reveals a
heart-shaped dimeric protein with a large central cavity [5]. It provides a
molecular model of the enzyme as an ATP-modulated clamp, with two sets of
jaws at opposite ends, connected by multiple joints [5]. An enzyme with 
bound DNA can admit a second DNA duplex through one set of jaws, transport
it through the cleaved first duplex, and expel it through the other set of
jaws [5]. 

TOPISMRASEII is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
DNA topoisomerase II. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those regions 
that characterise topoisomerase II but distinguish it from other closely 
related members of the topoisomerase II family - motif 2 encodes beta strand
2; motif 3 spans helix 3; motif 4 spans helices 4 and 5; motif 5 spans
strand 4 and the N-terminal portion of strand 5; motif 6 encodes the 
N-terminus of helix 8; motif 7 spans strand 9, helix 11 and the N-terminus
of helix 12; motif 8 spans helix 13 and strand 9; motif 9 includes helix 15;
motif 10 spans the C-terminus of strand 15 and the N-terminus of helix 18;
and motif 11 spans strand 21 and the N-terminus of helix 21. Two iterations
on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 29 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also 
found, all of which are topoisomerase II sequences that fail to match one
or more motifs.
