5HT3ARECEPTR
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) is widely distributed in both the
central and peripheral nervous system, where it acts as a neurotransmitter
and neuromodulator [1]. It has been implicated in several aspects of brain
function, including regulation of affective states, ingestive behavior and
addiction. 5-HT can activate a number of different receptor subtypes that
produce diverse neuronal responses, principally through activation of
G-protein-mediated signalling pathways. Signalling through the 5-HT3
receptor (5-HT3R) differs, since this subtype belongs to the ligand-gated
ion channel (LGIC) superfamily, which also includes the inhibitory
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A and glycine receptors, and excitatory
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) [2]. 5-HT3 receptor function has
been implicated in a variety of neural processes, including pain perception,
emesis, anxiety and drug abuse.

Like the other members of the LGIC superfamily, the 5HT3R exhibits a high
degree of sequence similarity, and therefore putative structural similarity,
with nAChRs [3]. Thus, funtional 5HT3Rs comprise a pentamer: the ion channel
is formed at the centre of a rosette formed between five homologous
subunits. Two classes of 5-HT3R subunit are currently known, termed 5-HT3A
and 5-HT3B. The proposed topology of 5-HT3R subunits comprises four putative
transmembrane (TM) domains (designated M1-4); a large extracellular
N-terminal region (~200 amino acids); and a variable cytoplasmic loop 
between M3 and M4. The M2 domains from each subunit are thought to form the
channel pore [5]. The agonist binding site is formed by the N-terminus,
which, on binding, induces a conformational change in the channel pore, a
process often referred to as "gating" [5]. Opening of the pore allows cation
flux through the neuronal membrane and depolarises the membrane potential.
Thus, 5-HT3Rs may be thought of as excitatory receptors [6].

Cloning of the 5-HT3A subunit from a neuroblastoma expression library was
reported in 1991 [7]. Whilst recombinant expression of 5-HT3A yields
functional receptors, the channel conductance and permeability to cations
are different from that observed for native receptors [4]. Alternative exon
splicing gives rise to two isoforms of 5-HT3A, termed 5-HT3AS and 5-HT3AL
for short and long variants, respectively. The 5-HT3RA subunit is widely
expressed throughout the peripheral and central nervous systems, including
several regions of the brain.

5HT3ARECEPTR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 5-HT3A
receptor subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the 
5-HT3A receptor subunits but distinguish them from 5-HT3B receptors - motifs
1 and 2 reside within the N-terminal domain; motifs 3 and 4 lie in the
variable cytoplasmic loop between M3 and M4; and motif 5 spans the 
C-terminal portion of M4. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 10 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, a putative truncated 
human 5-HT3A subunit lacking the N-terminus and TM domain M1.          
