TVDCCALPHA1
Calcium channel proteins are involved in the control of neurotransmitter
release from neurons [1], and play an important role in the regulation of a
variety of cellular functions, including membrane excitability, muscle
contraction and synaptic transmission [2]. Voltage-gated calcium channels
are classified as T, L, N, P, Q and R, and are distinguished by their
sensitivity to pharmacological blocks, single-channel conductance kinetics,
and voltage-dependence. On the basis of their voltage activation
properties, the voltage-gated calcium classes can be further divided into
two broad groups: the low (T-type) and high (L, N, P, Q and R-type)
threshold-activated channels [3].

Generally, the channel proteins are composed of 4 tightly-coupled subunits
(alpha-1, alpha-2, beta and gamma), the alpha-1 subunit from each creating
the pore for the import of extracellular calcium ions. The alpha-1 subunit
shares sequence characteristics with all voltage-dependent cation channels,
and exploits the same 6-helix bundle structural motif - in both sodium and
calcium channels, this motif is repeated 4 times within the sequence to give
a 24-helix bundle. Within each of these repeats, 5 of the transmembrane (TM)
segments (S1, S2, S3, S5, S6) are hydrophobic and one is positively charged
(S4) - the latter is characterised by charged amino acids at very third
position, and probably represents the voltage-sensor.

Several genes encoding alpha-1 subunits have been identified, each forming
a distinct electrophysiological channel [4]. T-type calcium channels are 
composed of alpha-1G and alpha-1H subunits [5]. They exhibit unique voltage-
dependent kinetics, small single channel conductance, rapid inactivation,
slow deactivation and a relatively high permeability to calcium [6]. They
are primarily responsible for rebound burst firing in central neurons and
are implicated in normal brain functions, such as slow wave sleep, and in
diseased states, such as epilepsy [6]. They also play an important role in
hormone secretion [7] and smooth muscle excitability [8].

TVDCCALPHA1 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
T-type voltage-dependent calcium channel alpha-1 subunit. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length: motif 1 lies in
the cytoplasmic N-terminus; motif 2 resides in the extracellular region
between TM domains 1 and 2 of repeat I; motif 3 spans the cytoplasmic region
between TM domain 6 of repeat I and TM domain 1 of repeat II; motif 4 
spans part of TM domain 1 of repeat II and the following extracellular
region; and motif 5 lies in the cytoplasmic region between TM domain 6 of
repeat III and domain I in repeat IV. Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 12
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, Q9W433,
a family member from Drosophila that fails to make significant matches with 
motifs 1 and 5.
