CRFRECEPTOR2
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a
manner reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to inter-
act with G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been
proposed to account for this, there is no significant sequence similarity
between these families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own
unique '7TM' signature.

Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is the principal neuroregulator of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis, playing an important role in
coordinating the endocrine, autonomic and behavioral responses to stress
and immune challenge [6]. The CRF receptor has been found in human cortex
tissue, pituitary, brainstem and testis [7]. The protein comprises 415 
amino acid residues with the characterstic 7TM architecture of the
secretin-like GPCR superfamily. Three isoforms (designated CRF-R1, CRF-R2
and CRF-R3) are produced as a result of alternative splicing of the same
gene: CRF-R1 appears to be the predominant form; CRF-R3 does not bind to
CRF with a high affinity [6]. For the CRF-R2 receptor, at least 2 splice 
forms with different 5'-coding sequences (CRF2 alpha and CRF2 beta) have 
been identified in rat [8].

The sequence of the CRF-R is highly conserved between species, the majority 
of the sequence divergence occuring in the putative signal peptide and 
extracellular N-terminal domain. The relative abundance of CRF-R2 messenger
RNA appears to be lower in humans than in rats for the heart and skeletal
tissues studied to date [8]. CRF-R2 stimulates cAMP production in response
to CRF and known CRF-like agonists [9]. CRF and the non-mammalian 
CRF-related peptides sauvagine and urotensin I stimulate adenylate cyclase
activity in a dose-dependent manner, with a rank order of potency that
differs from that of the CRF1 receptor (sauvagine>urotensin>=rat/human 
CRF>ovine CRF) [9]. The differences in the pharmacological profiles and 
tissue distributions of CRF-R1 and CRF-R2 suggests important functional
differences between the two receptors [9].   

CRFRECEPTOR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 2 
corticotropin releasing factor receptors. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the type 2 CRF receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the CRF receptor family - motifs 1-3 span the putative
N-terminal extracellular domain; motif 4 spans the first extracellular 
loop; and motif 5 resides within the second extracellular loop. A single
iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches
were found, O43461 and Q99431, both of which are type 2 CRF receptors that
fail to match the first motif. 
