FMOXYGENASE3
Flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) constitute a family of xenobiotic-
metabolising enzymes [1]. Using an NADPH cofactor and FAD prosthetic group,
these microsomal proteins catalyse the oxygenation of nucleophilic nitrogen,
sulphur, phosphorous and selenium atoms in a range of structurally diverse
compounds. FMOs have been implicated in the metabolism of a number of
pharmaceuticals, pesticides and toxicants. In man, lack of hepatic FMO-
catalysed trimethylamine metabolism results in trimethylaminuria (fish 
odour syndrome).

Five mammalian forms of FMO are now known and have been designated
FMO1-FMO5 [2-6]: this is a recent nomenclature based on comparison of
amino acid sequences, and has been introduced in an attempt to eliminate
confusion inherent in multiple, laboratory-specific designations and
tissue-based classifications [1]. Following the determination of the
complete nucleotide sequence of S.cerevisiae [7], a novel gene was found
to encode a protein with similarity to mammalian monooygenases.

The mRNA encoding FMO3 is abundant in adult liver and is also present, in
low abundance, in some foetal tissues [8]. Thus, like FMO1, FMO3 is subject
to developmental and tissue-specific regulation, with a developmental switch
in the expression of the genes taking place in the liver [8]. 

The deduced amino acid sequence of human FM03 includes the putative FAD-
(GxGxxG) and NADP+ pyrophosphate-binding (GxGxxA) sites characteristic of
mammalian FMOs [9], a 'FATGY' motif that has also been observed in a range
of siderphore biosynthetic enzymes [10], and a C-terminal hydrophobic 
segment that is believed to anchor the monooxygenase to the microsomal 
membrane [11].

Mutations in human FMO3 impair N-oxygenation of xenobiotics and are 
responsible for the trimethylaminuria phenotype [12]. Three disease-causing
mutations have been identified. Nonsense and missense mutations are 
associated with a severe phenotype and are also implicated in impaired
metabolism of other nitrogen- and sulphur-containing substrates, including
biogenic amines, both clinically and when mutated proteins expressed from
cDNA are studied in vitro [12]. Human FMO3 thus plays a critical role in the
metabolism of xenobiotic substrates and endogenous amines.

FMOXYGENASE3 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type
3 flavin-containing monooxygenases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise type 3 FMOs but distinguish them from the rest
of the FMO family - motif 7 spans the C-terminal hydrophobic region thought
to act as a membrane anchor. Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 4 sequences was
identified. 
