CHEMOKINER6
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Chemokines are proteins that have important physiological and patho- 
physiological roles in a wide range of acute and chronic inflammatory
processes [6]. Their sequences are similar and are characterised by a 
4-cysteine motif: the family can be divided according to whether the
first 2 Cys residues are adjacent (the C-C family), or separated by an
intervening residue (the C-x-C family). C-C chemokines are chemoattractant
for monocytes but not for neutrophils. The C-C family includes human
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), regulated on activation, normal
T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), and macrophage inflammatory 
proteins (MIP-1a and MIP-1b) [6].

C-C chemokine receptors are found in monocytes, lymphocytes, basophils and
eosinophils; mRNA is also found in some cell lines [6]. MCP-1 and MIP-1a
induce activation in low nanomolar concentrations and are highly selective
relative to C-x-C receptors. Calcium mobilisation has been demonstrated in
monocytes and in cells expressing the recombinant C-C receptor via an
uncharacterised G protein; pertussis toxin inhibits some of its actions [6].

The novel C-C chemokine, Liver and Activation-Regulated Chemokine (LARC)
functions as a chemoattractant for lymphocytes that express a class of
receptor specifically binding to LARC with high affinity. This class of
receptor has been identified as the orphan receptor GPR-CY4 and
consequently renamed CC chemokine receptor 6 (CC CKR6). Like most other C-C
chemokine receptors, agonist binding elicits an inward calcium flux and
migration in cells transfected with the receptor. Unusually for a chemokine
receptor, CC CKR6 appears to bind only LARC of the known chemokines [7].

CHEMOKINER6 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 6
C-C chemokine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections
that characterise the type 6 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the C-C chemokine receptor family - motif 1 spans the second extracellular
loop; and motifs 2-5 reside at the cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single
iteration on SPTR39_15f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
