NAHEXCHNGR3
Na+/H+ exchange proteins eject protons from cells, effectively eliminating
excess acid from actively metabolising cells. Na+/H+ exchange activity is
also crucial for the regulation of cell volume, and for the reabsorption of
NaCl across renal, intestinal, and other epithelia. These antiports exchange
Na+ for H+ in an electroneutral manner, and this activity is carried out by
a family of Na+/H+ exchangers, or NHEs, which are known to be present in
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. In mammalian cells, Na+/H+ exchange
activity is found in both the plasma membrane and inner mitochondrial
membrane. To date, six mammalian isoforms have been identified (designated
NHE1-NHE6) [1,2]. These exchangers are highly-regulated (glyco)phospho-
proteins, which, based on their primary structure, appear to contain 10-12
membrane-spanning regions at the N-terminus and a large cytoplasmic region
at the C-terminus. There is some evidence that they may exist in the cell
membrane as homodimers, but little is currently known about the mechanism
of their antiport [3].

NHE3, which shares around 40% amino acid identity with NHE1, appears not to
be glycosylated, and is found preferentially in the gastrointestinal tract
and the kidney. It is not readily inhibited by the diuretic amiloride, and 
immunological studies have localised it to the apical membranes of the renal
proximal tubule and intestinal epithelia, implicating this isoform in Na+
absorption.

NAHEXCHNGR3 is a 16-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Na+/H+ exchanger isoform 3 (NHE3). The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise NHE3 but distinguish it from other NHE isoforms -
motif 1 lies within the first putative extracellular loop; motif 2 encodes
about half the second transmembrane (TM) domain; motif 3 spans the third TM 
domain and the following extracellular loop; motifs 4 and 5 encode the third
and fourth extracellular loops; motif 6 spans the C-terminus of the sixth 
TM domain and a portion of the following cytoplasmic loop; motif 7 spans the
seventh TM domain and the fifth extracellular loop; and the remaining motifs,
8-16, reside at the cytoplasmic C-terminus. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 4 
sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found, CLU75970 and
MUU93492, both of which are NHE3 protein fragments, from black-tailed
prairie dog, and Mongolian gerbil, respectively.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
