ODORANTBNDNG
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration, and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Odour Binding Proteins (OBPs) [5] are associated with olfactory tissue, 
and seem able to bind odorant molecules with high specificity. Two studies 
identified a soluble protein from bovine nasal mucosa that constituted about
1% of total isolated protein and bound the bellpepper odorant 3-isobutyl-3-
methoxypyrazine; the isolate subsequently became known as pyrazine-binding
protein. It is most abundant in the tubulo-acinar cells of the respiratory 
epithelium of nasal mucosa, but is also present in olfactory mucosa, 
olfactory neurons and nasal secretions. Rat OBP is localised to the lateral
nasal, or Sterno's, gland, the largest of the 20 discrete nasal glands of 
the rat. A similar protein from the olfactory tissue of the frog Rana
pipiens, which was named protein BG (Bowman's gland), has been identified,
cloned and sequenced. Analysis of mRNA distributions showed that this
protein was specific to frog olfactory tissue. It is thought that the OBPs
may function by concentrating and delivering odorant molecules to their 
receptors.

Aphrodisin [6] is the major macromolecular component of hamster vaginal
discharge, and is secreted by vaginal tissue and the Bartholin's gland. 
These secretions, acting via the vomeronasal organ, are known to elicit a
copulatory response in male hamsters. If applied to the hind parts of an
unconscious male hamster and another male hamster is encouraged to nuzzle 
the treated area with its snout, the latter will reproducibly attempt an 
abortive copulation. By depleting these discharges of volatile components
and by fractionation, it can be shown that aphrodisin is responsible for
these effects, suggesting it is a mammalian proteinaceous pheromone. Cloned
aphrodisin expressed in Escherichia coli shows only modest activity compared
with the isolated hamster protein, but is fully active when combined with 
organic extracts of vaginal discharge, suggesting that it is the protein-
ligand complex that is fully functional.

Probasin [7] is a lipocalin originally isolated from the nuclei of rat 
dorsolateral prostate epithelial cells. Probasin mRNA expression, which is
regulated by androgens, gives rise to both a secreted and a nuclear form of
probasin, the relative abundance of the two forms being correlated with cell
type. Probasin concentration also seems to be closely linked with cell age
and state of differentiation.

Bovine lipocalin allergen Bos d 2 is found in the secretory cells of skin
apocrine sweat glands and the basement membranes of the epithelium and hair
follicles. Immunohistochemistry with a monoclonal anti-Bos d 2 antibody has
confirmed that skin is the only tissue where mRNA encoding Bos d 2 is 
detected. This suggest that Bos d 2 is produced in sweat glands and
transported to the skin surface as a carrier of a pheromone. Because dander 
allergens of several mammalian species are lipocalins, the biological 
function of pheromone transport appears to be a common feature of an
important group of aeroallergens [8].

ODORANTBNDNG is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
odorant binding protein outlier lipocalins. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the odorant binding proteins but distinguish 
them from the rest of the lipocalin superfamily - motif 1 spans beta-
strand 1 and helix 2 and includes the characteristic GxW triplet (cf.
LIPOCALIN signature motif 1 and PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213)); motif
2 encodes the N-terminal half of strand 2; motif 3 encodes strand 3; motif 4
spans strand 5 and the N-terminal portion of strand 6 (cf. LIPOCALIN
signature motif 2); and motif 5 spans helix 4 and strand 9. Two iterations
on SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 8 sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also 
found, all of which are kernal lipocalins that match two motifs.  
