NGFBETA
During the development of the vertebrate nervous system, many neurons
become redundant (because they have died, failed to connect to target
cells, etc.) and are eliminated. At the same time, developing neurons send
out axon outgrowths that contact their target cells [1]. Such cells control
their degree of innervation (the number of axon connections) by the
secretion of various specific neurotrophic factors that are essential for
neuron survival. One of these is nerve growth factor (NGF), which is
involved in the survival of some classes of embryonic neuron (e.g., peri-
pheral sympathetic neurons) [1]. NGF is mostly found outside the central
nervous system (CNS), but slight traces have been detected in adult CNS
tissues, although a physiological role for this is unknown [1]; it has also
been found in several snake venoms [2,3]. Proteins similar to NGF include
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophins 3 to 7, all of
which demonstrate neuron survival and outgrowth activities.

Although NGF was originally identified in snake venom, its most abundant 
and best studied source is the submaxillary gland of adult male mice [4]. 
Mouse NGF is a high molecular weight hexamer, composed of 2 subunits each
of alpha, beta and gamma polypeptides. The beta subunit (NGF-beta) is 
responsible for the physiological activity of the complex [4].

NGF-beta induces its cell survival effects through activation of
neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 1 (NTRK1; also called TrkA), and
can induce cell death by binding to the low affinity nerve growth factor
receptor, p75NTR [5]. The neurotophin has been shown to be involved in 
sympathetic axon growth and innervation of target fields [6].

NGFBETA is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the nerve
growth factor beta subunit. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 17 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions  
spanning the C-terminal half of the alignment, motifs 1 and 2 each 
encompassing short beta strands. Six iterations on SPTR55_38f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 47 sequences
was identified.
