TNFACTORR9
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 9 (also known as ILA and CD137 antigen) is expressed by
activated T and B lymphocytes and monocytes. Stimulation of the receptor
inhibits proliferation of activated T lymphocytes and induces programmed 
cell death [7].

TNFACTORR9 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 9. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in 
the C-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise TNF receptor 9 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motif 1 lies partially in the transmembrane domain and partially
within the C-terminal cytoplasmic region; and motifs 2 and 3 reside within
the C-terminal cytoplasmic region. Two iterations on SPTR55_38f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 7 
sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also found, all
of which fail to match motif 1: Q8R037_MOUSE is a translated cDNA from
mouse; and A9YYF0_MACFA and A9YYF1_MACFA are receptor variants from crab- 
eating macaque.
