BICOMPNTOXIN
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive coccus that grows in clusters or
pairs, and is the major cause of nosocomial infections due to its multiple 
antibiotic resistant nature [1]. Patients who are immunocompromised (e.g., 
those suffering from third degree burns or chronic illness) are at risk 
from deep staphylococcal infections, such as osteomyelitis and pneumonia.
Most skin infections are also caused by this bacterium [1].

Many virulence mechanisms are employed by Staphylococci to induce 
pathogenesis: these can include polysaccharide capsules and exotoxins [1].
Examples of the latter are bi-component toxins, which involve the
synergistic combination of an "S" and an "F" component [2]. These undergo 
conformational changes in their protein structure and form oligomeric pores
in the target cell membrane upon recognition of certain host receptors. The
main cells targeted are polymorphonuclear cells, monocytes, erythrocytes 
and macrophages. Examples of this protein family include: leucocidin, gamma-
hemolysin and alpha-hemolysin.

Recently, the crystal structure of the Staphylococcus aureus leucocidin "F" 
component (LukF) has been determined to 1.9A resolution [3]. This structure,
which comprises a central 3-strand beta-sheet, with an N-terminal "latch",
clarified the mechanism of virulence in the bi-component toxin. Further work
using a different form of the leucocidin (LukF-PV) has suggested that it may
be a representative fold for water-soluble transmembrane toxins [4].

BICOMPNTOXIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Staphylococcal bi-component toxin family. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length (~250 amino acids) - motif 1
spans the C-terminus of beta-strand 4 and the N-terminus of strand 5 of the
LukF structure; motif 2 encodes the C-terminus of strand 7 and the whole of
strand 8; and motif 3 spans strands 13 and 14. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 24
sequences was identified. 
