KIR32CHANNEL
Potassium channels are found in virtually all cell types. Their pore-
forming subunits fall into three structural families, i.e. those possessing
six, four and two transmembrane (TM) domains. The six-TM domain K+ channels
can be further subdivided into six families: the voltage-gated K+ channels
(Kv), the KCNQ channels, the eag-like K+ channels, and three Ca2+-activated
K+ channels. Inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir) are the principal class
of two-TM domain K+ channels, and the recently-discovered two-pore domain
K+ channels, make up a family of four-TM domain K+ channels.

Inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) are responsible for regulating
diverse processes including: cellular excitability, vascular tone, heart
rate, renal salt flow, and insulin release [1]. To date, around twenty
members of this superfamily have been cloned, which can be grouped into six
families by sequence similarity - these are designated Kir1.x-7.x [2,3].

Cloned Kir channel cDNAs encode proteins of between ~370-500 residues,
containing two predicted TM domains, with the characteristic K+ channel
pore-forming domain located between them. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be cytoplasmic, and the N-terminus lacks a signal sequence. It is thought
that four Kir subunits assemble to form a tetrameric channel complex, which
may be hetero- or homomeric [1].

The Kir3.x channel family are gated by G proteins following G protein
coupled receptor (GPCR) activation. They are widely distributed in
neuronal, atrial, and endocrine tissues and play key roles in generating
late inhibitory postsynaptic potentials, slowing the heart rate and
modulating hormone release. They are directly activated by G protein
beta-gamma subunits released from G protein heterotrimers of the G(i/o)
family upon appropriate receptor stimulation.

Kir3.2 is thought to associate with Kir3.1 to form Kir channel heteromers
in heart tissue. In central neurones, Kir3.2 homomers may exist, although
these may contain combinations of the three splice variants of Kir3.2 that
have been identified [4]. Weaver mice, which suffer neurological and
reproductive deficits, have a point mutation in the gene encoding Kir3.2.
This lies in the pore-forming domain of the channel, and as a result they
lose their selectivity for K+, allowing Na+ to pass through the channel 
pore [5].

KIR32CHANNEL is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kir3.2 inward rectifier K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise Kir3.2 but distinguish it from other subtypes -
motifs 1-2 lie within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; and motifs 3-6
encode portions of the cytoplasmic C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5
sequences was identified.
