PENKAPRCRSR
Vertebrate endogenous opioid neuropeptides are released by post-transla-
tional proteolytic cleavage of precursor proteins. The precursors consist of
the following components: a signal sequence that precedes a conserved region
of about 50 residues; a variable-length region; and the sequence of the 
neuropeptide itself. Three types of precursor are known: preproenkephalin A 
(gene PENK), which is processed to produce 6 copies of Met-enkephalin, plus
Leu-enkephalin; preproenkephalin B (gene PDYN), which is processed to
produce neoendorphin, dynorphin, leumorphin, rimorphin and Leu-enkephalin;
and prepronocipeptin (gene PNOC), whose processing produces nociceptin
(orphanin FQ) and two other potential neuropeptides.

Sequence analysis reveals that the conserved N-terminal region of the
precursors contains 6 cysteines, which are probably involved in disulphide
bond formation. It is speculated that this region might be important for 
neuropeptide processing [1].

The primary structure of rat preproenkephalin is highly similar to those of
bovine and human preproenkephalins, and contains four copies of Met-
enkephalin, one of Leu-enkephalin, one of Met-enkephalin-Arg6-Gly7-Leu8,
and one of Met-enkephalin-Arg6-Phe7 [3,4]. Rat preproenkephalin contains
269 amino acid residues, making it larger than the human (267 residues) 
and bovine (263 residues) precursors [3,4]. 

PENKAPRCRSR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
proenkephalin A precursor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that 
characterise the proenkephalin A precursors but distinguish them from the
rest of the opioid neuropeptide precursor family - motif 1 spans the signal
sequence; motifs 2 and 3 reside within the N-terminal Cys-rich region 
encoded by PROSITE pattern OPIOIDS_PRECURSOR (PS01252), falling between the
third and fourth, and fifth and sixth conserved Cys residues respectively;
motifs 4 and 5 lie within the variable region, motif 5 lying immediately 
N-terminal to the first Met-enkephalin; motif 6 spans an acidic region that
precedes the third Met-enkephalin; motif 8 includes the C-terminal residues 
of Met-enkephalin-Arg-Gly-Leu; motif 9 spans the region just preceding the
Leu-enkephalin peptide; and motif 10 spans an acidic region that lies
N-terminal to Met-enkephalin-Arg-Phe. Two iterations on OWL30.2 were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of
which are family members and fragments that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences, and 1
partial match.
