TRNASYNTHTYR
Appropriate attachment of an amino acid to its cognate tRNA is the key to
faithful translation of the genetic code. The family of enzymes responsible
for this is the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (AATRSs) (EC 6.1.1.-).

AATRSs catalyse a two-step reaction:

(1) Enzyme + amino acid + ATP ---> Enzyme(aminoacyl-AMP) + PPi

(2) tRNA + Enzyme(aminoacyl-AMP) ---> aminoacyl-tRNA + AMP + Enzyme

In the first step, they form an aminoacyl-adenylate, in which the carboxyl
of the amino acid is linked to the alpha-phosphate of ATP, by displacing
the pyrophosphate. When the correct tRNA is bound, the aminoacyl group is
transferred to the 2'- or 3'-terminal OH of the tRNA at the expense of AMP
[1].

Based on structural and sequence comparisons, this group of at least 20
proteins (in prokaryotes there are approximately 20, but in eukaryotes
there are usually 2 forms for each amino acid; namely, the cytosolic and
mitochondrial forms) can be divided into two classes.

Class I AATRSs contain a characteristic Rossman fold and are mostly
monomeric. At the primary structure level, two highly-conserved motifs
are observed, 'HIGH' and 'KMSKS' [2,3]; these are associated with the ATP-
binding site.

Class II AATRSs share an anti-parallel beta-sheet formation, flanked by
alpha-helices [3], and are mostly dimeric or multimeric.

Further distinction between the two classes is evident when the reaction
mechanisms are investigated. In reactions catalysed by the class I AATRSs,
the aminoacyl group is coupled to the 2'-hydroxyl of the tRNA, while, in
class II reactions, the 3'-hydroxyl site is preferred.

Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (EC 6.1.1.3) is specific to tyrosine and belongs to 
class I.

TRNASYNTHTYR is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 17 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
within the N-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 contains the 
characteristic 'HIGH' motif and spans the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
AA_TRNA_LIGASE_I (PS00178). Two iterations on OWL31.1 were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 29 sequences was 
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are
related sequences or fragments that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 30 sequences, and 7
partial matches.
