LVDCCALPHA1S
Calcium channel proteins are involved in the control of neurotransmitter
release from neurons [1], and play an important role in the regulation of a
variety of cellular functions, including membrane excitability, muscle
contraction and synaptic transmission [2]. Voltage-gated calcium channels
are classified as T, L, N, P, Q and R, and are distinguished by their
sensitivity to pharmacological blocks, single-channel conductance kinetics,
and voltage-dependence. On the basis of their voltage activation
properties, the voltage-gated calcium classes can be further divided into
two broad groups: the low (T-type) and high (L, N, P, Q and R-type)
threshold-activated channels [3].

Generally, the channel proteins are composed of 4 tightly-coupled subunits
(alpha-1, alpha-2, beta and gamma), the alpha-1 subunit from each creating
the pore for the import of extracellular calcium ions. The alpha-1 subunit
shares sequence characteristics with all voltage-dependent cation channels,
and exploits the same 6-helix bundle structural motif - in both sodium and
calcium channels, this motif is repeated 4 times within the sequence to give
a 24-helix bundle. Within each of these repeats, 5 of the transmembrane (TM)
segments (S1, S2, S3, S5, S6) are hydrophobic and one is positively charged
(S4) - the latter is characterised by charged amino acids at very third
position, and probably represents the voltage-sensor.

Several genes encoding alpha-1 subunits have been identified, each forming
a distinct electrophysiological channel [4]. L-type calcium channels are
formed from alpha-1S, alpha-1C and alpha-1D subunits. They are widely 
distributed and are well characterised in the heart, smooth and skeletal
muscle, and some neurons. Their primary functions are in both excitation-
contraction and excitation-secretion coupling. In skeletal muscle, the 
L-type calcium channels act as a voltage sensor for excitation-contraction
coupling and, in cardiac muscle, they provide a pathway for calcium influx. 
Mutations affecting L-type channel subunits result in three diseases: 
(1) muscular dystrophy, which is characterised by a lack of functional 
skeletal muscle; (2) hypokalaemic periodic paralysis, which is characterised
by episodic attacks of skeletal muscle weakness; and (3) malignant
hyperthermia, which is the main cause of death due to anaesthesia [3].

The cDNA encoding the alpha-1S subunit from rabbit skeletal muscle was the
first calcium channel subunit sequence to be cloned [5]. The alpha-1S 
subunit is present in skeletal muscle and has also been detected in kidney
and brain [5,6]. In the skeletal muscle, it is present in two size variants,
a full-length, minor (~5%) form of ~212kDa, and a major (~95%) species of
~190kDa, derived from the longer protein by post-translational cleavage [7].

LVDCCALPHA1S is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel alpha-1S subunit. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment,
focusing on those sections that characterise the alpha-1S subunit but
distinguish it from other members of the alpha-1 subunit family - motif 1
lies in the cytoplasmic region between TM domain 6 of repeat I and TM domain
1 of repeat II; and motifs 2 and 3 reside in the cytoplasmic region between
TM domain 6 of repeat II and TM domain 1 of repeat III. Two iterations on
SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 5 sequences was identified.
