JANUSKINASE3
Janus kinases (JAKs) are tyrosine kinases that function in membrane-proximal
signalling events initiated by a variety of extracellular factors binding to
cell surface receptors. Many type I and II cytokine receptors lack a protein
tyrosine kinase domain and rely on JAKs to initiate the cytoplasmic signal 
transduction cascade [1,2]. Ligand binding induces oligomerisation of the
receptors, which then activates the cytoplasmic receptor-associated JAKs.
These subsequently phosphorylate tyrosine residues along the receptor chains
with which they are associated. The phosphotyrosine residues are a target
for a variety of SH2 domain-containing transducer proteins. Amongst these
are the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins,
which, after binding to the receptor chains, are phosphorylated by the JAK
proteins. Phosphorylation enables the STAT proteins to dimerise and
translocate into the nucleus, where they alter the expression of cytokine-
regulated genes. This system is known as the JAK-STAT pathway [3]

Four mammalian JAK family members have been identified: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, 
and TYK2. They are relatively large kinases of approximately 1150 amino 
acids, with molecular weights of ~120-130kDa. Their amino acid sequences
are characterised by the presence of 7 highly conserved domains, termed
JAK homology (JH) domains [4]. The C-terminal domain (JH1) is responsible 
for the tyrosine kinase function. The next domain in the sequence (JH2) is 
known as the tyrosine kinase-like domain, as its sequence shows high 
similarity to functional kinases but does not possess any catalytic 
activity [5]. Although the function of this domain is not well established,
there is some evidence for a regulatory role on the JH1 domain, thus
modulating catalytic activity [6]. The N-terminal portion of the JAKs 
(spanning JH7 to JH3) is important for receptor association and 
non-catalytic activity [7].

JAK3 was initially cloned using a PCR-based strategy utilising degenerate
primers corresponding to conserved motifs within the catalytic domain of 
protein-tyrosine kinases [8]. By contrast with the relatively ubiquitous 
expression of JAK1, JAK2 and TYK2, JAK3 has more restricted and regulated 
tissue expression. It is expressed constitutively at high levels in NK cells
and thymocytes, and is inducible in T cells, B cells and myeloid cells. JAK3
is also expressed in vascular smooth muscle cells and endothelium [2].

JANUSKINASE3 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
janus kinase 3 (JAK3) proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise JAK3 but distinguish it from other family members - 
motif 1 lies in the JH6 domain; motif 2 resides partially within the JH5
domain and partially between the JH5 and JH4 domains; motif 3 lies in the 
JH3 domain; and motif 4 resides in the JH2 tyrosine kinase-like domain. Two
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified.
