WNT1PROTEIN
Wnt proteins constitute a large family of secreted molecules that are
involved in intercellular signalling during development. The name derives
from the first 2 members of the family to be discovered: int-1 (mouse) and
wingless (Drosophila) [1]. It is now recognised that Wnt signalling controls
many cell fate decisions in a variety of different organisms, including
mammals [2]. Wnt signalling has been implicated in tumorigenesis, early
mesodermal patterning of the embryo, morphogenesis of the brain and kidneys,
regulation of mammary gland proliferation and Alzheimer's disease [3,4].

Wnt-mediated signalling is believed to proceed initially through binding to
cell surface receptors of the frizzled family; the signal is subsequently
transduced through several cytoplasmic components to B-catenin, which enters
the nucleus and activates the transcription of several genes important in
development [5]. More recently, however, several non-canonical Wnt
signalling pathways have been elucidated that act independently of
B-catenin [6]. Members of the Wnt gene family are defined by their sequence
similarity to mouse Wnt-1 and Wingless in Drosophila. They encode proteins
of ~350-400 residues in length, with orthologues identified in several,
mostly vertebrate, species. Very little is known about the structure of 
Wnts as they are notoriously insoluble; in terms of primary structure, the
family is characterised by a signal sequence and an almost invariant pattern
of 23-24 conserved cysteines [1]. Fifteen major Wnt gene families have been 
identified in vertebrates, with multiple subtypes within some classes.

The Wnt-1 gene was first identified in 1982 as a proto-oncogene activated by
the integration of mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) in mammary tumours.
With the identification of Drosophila wingless, however, it became clear
that Wnt genes are important regulators of many developmental decisions.
Mutation of the embryonic mouse Wnt-1 gene leads to loss of the midbrain and
cerebellum; and a number of processes including segment polarity and limb
development are interrupted in Drosophila wingless mutants [1].

WNT1PROTEIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for Wnt-1
proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise Wnt-1
proteins but distinguish them from related Wnt subtypes - motifs 1 and 2 lie
towards the N-terminus, between the putative signal peptide and the first
conserved cysteine residue; and motifs 3-5 reside between conserved 
cysteines in the C-terminal portion. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6 
sequences was identified.
