NGELATINASE
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloproteinase inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Murine neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin precursor (NGAL) exhibits
a 7-10-fold increase in expression in cultured mouse kidney cells infected
by simian-virus 40 or other viruses [5]. NGAL has been identified as a 
major secretory product of lipopolysaccharide-stimulated cultured mouse 
macrophages, suggesting that the protein might function in defence against
infection [6]. Recently, NGAL has been shown to be identical to SIP24, a 
previously identified secretory product of quiescent mouse fibroblasts 
induced by serum, dexamethasone, basic fibroblast growth factor, and phorbol
ester [7]. Mouse plasma levels of NGAL rise as a result of increased 
expression levels in the liver, in response to intramuscular turpentine 
injection. Tumour necrosis factor can regulate NGAL expression in cultured 
liver cells. These findings indicate that NGAL is a positive acute phase
protein and may possess immunosuppressive or anti-inflammatory properties, 
possibly linked to its regulation of neutrophil gelatinase or other plasma
protein [8]. The uterus is also a major site of NGAL synthesis, especially
at parturition, when expression increases significantly, suggesting a
physiological role for the protein in uterine secretions [9].

NGELATINASE is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes the
long, unstructured but functionally important N-terminal peptide; motif 2 
spans the first beta-strand of the lipocalin barrel, including the region
encoded by PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213) and corresponds to the 
LIPOCALIN fingerprint motif 1; motif 3 spans strands B and C, and the
intervening loop; likewise, motif 4 spans strands D and E and the loop
between them; motif 5 spans strands F and G, and corresponds to the second
LIPOCALIN motif; motif 6, which corresponds to strand H and the loop 
connecting it to the main C-terminal alpha helix, is similar to the third
motif of the LIPOCALIN fingerprint; and motif 7 spans the C-terminus of the
large C-terminal helix and the short beta-strand I. Two iterations on
SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 3 sequences was identified.
