MCH2RECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide originally
identified in teleost fish [6,7]. In fish, MCH is released from the
pituitary and causes lightening of skin pigment cells through pigment
aggregation [6,8]. In mammals, MCH is predominantly expressed in the
hypothalamus, and functions as a neurotransmitter in the control of a range
of functions [8]. A major role of MCH is thought to be in the regulation of
feeding: injection of MCH into rat brains stimulates feeding; expression of
MCH is upregulated in the hypothalamus of obese and fasting mice; and mice
lacking MCH are lean and eat less [6]. MCH and alpha melanocyte-stimulating
hormone (alpha-MSH) have antagonistic effects on a number of physiological
functions. Alpha-MSH darkens pigmentation in fish and reduces feeding in
mammals, whereas MCH increases feeding [6,8].

Two G protein-coupled receptors, MCH1 and MCH2, have recently been
identified as receptors for the hormone.

The expression profile of MCH2 is similar to that of MCH1, with highest
levels being found in the brain. However, expression of MCH2 is
significantly lower than MCH1 in the pituitary, hypothalamus, locus
coeruleus, medulla oblongata, and cerebellum [9]. Binding of MCH to the
receptor causes a pertussis toxin-insensitive increase in intracellular
calcium, suggesting coupling to Gq proteins [9].

MCH2RECEPTOR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
melanin-concentrating hormone 2 receptor. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within N- and C-terminal and loop regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the MCH2 receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the MCH receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 span the 
N-terminus; motif 3 encodes the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 lies in the
first external loop; motif 5 spans the second cytoplasmic loop, leading into
TM domain 4; motif 6 resides in the second external loop; motif 7 spans the
third cytoplasmic loop; motif 8 is located at the N-terminus of TM domain 7;
and motif 9 encodes the C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR40_22f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6 
sequences was identified.
