TNFACTORR6
Like all apoptotic cell death, T cell receptor (TCR)-mediated death can be
divided into two phases: an inductive phase and an effector phase. The 
effector phase includes a sequence of steps that are common to apoptosis in
many cell types, which, if not interrupted, will lead to cell death. The
induction phase, which often requires the expression of new genes, consists
of a set of signals that activate the effector phase. Outside the thymus,
most, if not all, of the TCR-mediated apoptosis of mature T cells (sometimes
referred to as activation-induced cell death (AICD)) is induced through the
surface antigen Fas pathway: activation through the TCR induces expression
of the Fas (CD95) ligand (FasL); the expression of FasL on either a
neighbouring cell, or on the Fas-bearing cell, induces trimerisation of Fas,
which then initiates a signal-transduction cascade, leading to apoptosis of 
the Fas-bearing cell. This commitment stage requires the activation of key
death-inducing enzymes, termed caspases, which act by cleaving proteins that
are essential for cell survival and proliferation [1,2].

Fas is also known to be essential in the death of hyperactivated peripheral
CD4+ cells: in the absence of Fas, mature peripheral T cells do not die, but
the activated cells continue to proliferate, producing cytokines that lead
to grossly enlarged lymph nodes and spleen. Fas belongs to the tumour
necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family of cysteine-rich type I membrane
receptors; its ligand (FasL) is expressed on activated lymphocytes, NK cells,
platelets, certain immune-privileged cells and some tumour cells [1,3].

Defects in the Fas-FasL system are associated with various disease syndromes.
Mice with non-functional Fas or FasL display characteristics of lympho-
proliferative disorder, such as lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and elevated 
secretion of IgM and IgG. These mice also secrete anti-DNA autoantibodies
and rheumatoid factor [3].

TNFACTORR6 (formerly FASRECEPTOR) is a 5-element fingerprint that provides
a signature for tumour necrosis factor 6 (FAS/CD95 receptor family). The
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs
were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment
length - motif 3 spans alpha-helix 1 and beta-strand 1; and motif 4 
encompasses strand 2. Two iterations on SPTR39_17f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 18 sequences was
identified. Three partial matches were also found: Q9XS60 is a Fas antigen
263-residue splice variant that lacks motif 5; and Q14292 and Q16652 are
Fas soluble proteins that lack the region of sequence bearing motifs 4 and 5.

An update on SPTR55_38f identified a true set comprising 24 sequences,
together with 3 partial matches.
