INTEGRINA
Integrins constitute a large family of cell surface receptors that mediate
both cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion [1,2]. They are widely expressed and
have a number of other roles that make them important therapeutic targets in
conditions such as atherosclerosis, thrombosis, cancer and asthma.

Structurally, integrins are heterodimeric associations of alpha and beta 
chains. No crystallographic data exist for the heterodimer as a whole, but
images of the gross overall structure have been obtained using electron
microscopy. Each subunit has a large globular N-terminal extracellular
domain, a single transmembrane (TM) domain, and a short C-terminal 
cytoplasmic region. The exact pairing of alpha- and beta-subunits determines
ligand specificity, localisation and function. Integrins interact with a
variety of extra-cellular matrix (ECM) proteins (such as fibronectin, 
collagen, laminin and fibrinogen) via RGD motifs in the ECM protein ligands.

Within the N-terminal domain of alpha subunits, seven sequence repeats, each
of approximately 60 amino acids, have been found [3]. It has been predicted 
that these repeats assume a beta-propeller fold. The domains contain seven 
four-stranded beta-sheets arranged in a torus around a pseudosymmetry axis
[4]. Integrin ligands and a putative Mg2+ ion are predicted to bind to the
upper face of the propeller, in a manner analogous to the way in which the
trimeric G protein beta subunit (G beta) (which also has a beta-propeller
fold) binds the G protein alpha subunit [4].

INTEGRINA is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for integrin
alpha subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 10
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motifs 1-7 span the N-terminal extracellular
domain; and motif 8 lies within the TM domain. Four iterations on SPTR37_10f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 41
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of 
which are integrin alpha subunits and homologues that fail to match one or
more motifs.
