TOXICSSTOXIN
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive coccus that grows in clusters or
pairs, and is the major cause of nosocomial infections due to its multiple 
antibiotic resistant nature [1]. Patients who are immunocompromised (e.g., 
those suffering from third degree burns or chronic illness) are at risk 
from deep staphylococcal infections, such as osteomyelitis and pneumonia.
Most skin infections are also caused by this bacterium [1].

Many virulence mechanisms are employed by Staphylococci to induce 
pathogenesis: these can include polysaccharide capsules and exotoxins [1].
One of the major virulence exotoxins is toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST),
which is secreted by the organism upon successful invasion. It causes a
major inflammatory response in the host via superantigenic properties [2],
and is the causative agent of toxic shock syndrome.

The structure of the TSST protein was originally determined to 2.5A by means
of X-ray crystallography [2]. The N- and C-terminal domains both contain
regions involved in MHC class II association; the C-terminal domain is also
implicated in binding the T-cell receptor [2]. Overall, the structure 
resembles that of Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) [3], but differs in its
N-terminus and in the degree to which a long central helix is covered by 
surface loops [3]. The region around the carboxyl end of this helix is 
proposed to govern the superantigenic properties of TSST [3]. An adjacent
region along this helix is thought to be critical in the ability of TSST
to induce toxic shock syndrome [3]. Most recently, the structures of five 
mutants of TSST have been determined to 1.95A [4]. The mutations are in 
the central alpha-helix, and allow mapping of portions of TSST involved in
superantigenicity and lethality [4].

TOXICSSTOXIN is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome toxin-1. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~220 amino acids) - 
motif 2 encodes alpha-helix 1 of the 1.9A resolved structure; motif 3 spans
beta-strands 1 and 2; motif 4 encodes strands 4 and 5; motif 5 spans strands
6-8; motif 6 spans the N-terminus of strand 9 and strands 10 and 11; motif 7
encodes the bulk of helix 2 and the N-terminal residues of strand 13; motif
8 spans the C-terminus of strand 13 and strand 14; and motif 9 spans strand
15 and helix 4. A single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Four partial matches were found (Q9ZFS4, Q9ZFS6, Q9ZFS5 and Q9RN32) all of
which are Staphyloccocal exotoxins that match motifs 2, 7, 8 and/or 9.
