AMPHIPHYSIN1
Amphiphysins are proteins that are thought to be involved in clathrin-
mediated endocytosis, actin function, and signalling pathways. They are
highly concentrated in nerve terminals, where they may act as linkers
between the clathrin coat and dynamin in the endocytosis of synaptic
vesicles. Such recycling of synaptic vesicles is necessary for
neurotransmission to continue, following neurotransmitter release.
Amphiphysin family members share a similar three-domain organisation: the
N-terminal domain contains six heptad repeats, which are predicted to form
a coiled-coiled structure, thought to be involved in the dimerisation of
amphiphysin molecules; the central region binds the heavy chain of clathrin
and the clathrin adaptor protein AP-2, through distinct sites; and the
C-terminal domain contains a Src-homology-3 (SH3) domain that binds the 
GTPase dynamin and the inositol-5'-phosphatase synaptojanin-1. The 
interactions mediated by both the central and C-terminal domains are
believed to be modulated by proten phosphorylation [1,2].

Amphiphysin 1 was first identified in 1992 as a brain protein that was
partially-associated with synaptic vesicles. Following its cloning, it was
also realised to be a human auto-antigen that is detected in a rare
neurological disease, Stiff-Man Syndrome, and also in certain types of
cancer [3].

AMPHIPHYSIN1 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
amphiphysin isoform 1. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the amphiphysin isoform 1 but distinguish it from other
isoforms - motifs 1-2 are located near the N-terminus, prior to the
putative coiled-coil domain; motifs 3-5 lie between the coiled-coil domain
and the proline-rich region; motif 6 occurs after this proline-rich region;
and motif 7 encodes a portion of the C-terminal SH3 domain. A single
iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
