TYPE3OMKPROT
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[2] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [3]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [3], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

One of the outer membrane protein subunit families, termed "K" here for
nomenclature purposes, aids in the structural assembly of the invasion
complex [4]. It is also described as a lipoprotein. Members of this family 
include the Salmonella PrgK and SsaJ genes, MxiJ from Shigella, YscJ from
Yersinia, and from the plant enteropathogens NolT (Rhizobium) and HrcJ 
(Erwinia). The flagellar M-ring protein FliF also shares a low level of
similarity, presumably due to evolution of the type III secretion system
from the flagellar biosynthetic pathway.

TYPE3OMKPROT is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type III secretion system outer membrane K protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~290 amino acids).
Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified. Three partial 
matches were also found: O84563 and Q9Z778 are Chlamydia YscJ gene products
that fail to match motifs 3 and 4; and O54239 is a flagellar basal body
MS-ring protein that matches motifs 4 and 5. 
