GIPRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a
manner reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to inter-
act with G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been
proposed to account for this, there is no significant sequence similarity
between these families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own
unique '7TM' signature.

Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) plays an important role
in the regulation of postprandial insulin secretion and proinsulin gene 
expression of pancreatic beta-cells [6]. The human GIP-receptor encodes a
7TM protein that is similar to the human glucagon-like peptide 1(GLP-1) 
receptor. It is hoped that an understanding of GIP-receptor regulation and
signal transduction will shed light on the hormone's failure to exert its
biological action at the pancreatic B-cell in type II diabetes mellitus. 

GIPRECEPTOR is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for  
gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptors. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptors but 
distinguish them from the rest of the secretin-like superfamily - motifs 1-6
span the N-terminal domain; motif 7 resides in the loop between TM domains 2
and 3; motif 8 spans the loop between TM domains 3 and 4; motif 9 spans the C-terminal portion of TM domain 6 and
loop between TM domains 4 and 5; and motifs 10 and 11 reside at the 
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence,
no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial 
matches were also found, secretin and glucagon receptors that match motifs
1, 8 and 9.
