TGFBETA
The transforming growth factors-beta (TGF-beta 1-5) constitute a family of
multi-functional cytokines that regulate cell growth and differentiation [1].
Many cells synthesise TGF-beta, and essentially all have specific receptors 
for this peptide [2]. TGF-beta regulates the actions of many other peptide
growth factors and determines a positive or negative direction of their 
effects. The protein functions as a disulphide-linked homodimer. Its
sequence is characterised by the presence of several C-terminal cysteine
residues, which form interlocking disulphide links arranged in a knot-like
topology. A similar "cystine-knot" arrangement has been noted in the
structures of some enzyme inhibitors and neurotoxins that bind to voltage-
gated Ca2+ channels, although the precise topology differs. 

The three-dimensional structures of several members of the TGF-beta super-
family have been deduced [5-7]. The solution structure of human TGF-beta 1
was determined using multinuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy with
hybrid distance geometry/simulated annealing [6]. The structure shows a high
degree of similarity to that of TGF-beta 2, but with notable differences in
structure and flexibility [6]. The crystal structure of the TGF-beta 2
monomer lacks a well-defined hydrophobic core and displays an unusual
elongated non-globular fold [7]. Eight cysteine residues form 4 intra-chain
disulphide bonds, creating the characteristic knotted arrangement. The dimer
is stabilised by a ninth cysteine, which forms an inter-chain disulphide 
bond, and by 2 identical hydrophobic interfaces. Other members of the TGF-
beta superfamily, including activins, inhibins and various developmental
factors, are also likely to adopt the TGF-beta fold. The crystal structure
of TGF-beta 3 reveals a near identical central core to that of TGF-beta 2 
[5]. The principal differences are witnessed in the conformations of the 
N-terminal alpha-helix and in the beta-sheet loops [5], which could account
for the individual cellular responses, if these differences are recognised
by the TGF-beta receptors.

TGFBETA is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
transforming growth factor beta precursor superfamily. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment. Two 
iterations on SPTR39_14f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 26 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found, all of which are family members that fail to make
significant matches with one or more motifs.
