DENSEGRNULE6 
Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular apicomplexan protozoan 
parasite, with a complex lifestyle involving varied hosts [1]. It has two 
phases of growth: an intestinal phase in feline hosts, and an extra-
intestinal phase in other mammals. Oocysts from infected cats develop 
into tachyzoites, and eventually, bradyzoites and zoitocysts in the 
extraintestinal host [1]. Transmission of the parasite occurs through 
contact with infected cats or raw/undercooked meat; in immunocompromised 
individuals, it can cause severe and often lethal toxoplasmosis. Acute 
infection in healthy humans can sometimes also cause tissue damage [1].

The protozoan utilises a variety of secretory and antigenic proteins to 
invade a host and gain access to the intracellular environment [2]. These 
originate from distinct organelles in the T.gondii cell termed micronemes,  
rhoptries, and dense granules. They are released at specific times during 
invasion to ensure the proteins are allocated to their correct target 
destinations [2]. 

Dense granule antigens (GRAs) are released from the T.gondii tachyzoite
while still encapsulated in a host vacuole. Gra6, one of these moieties, is
associated with the parasitophorous vacuole [3]. It possesses a hydrophobic
central region flanked by two hydrophilic domains, and is present as a
single copy gene in the T.gondii genome [3]. Gra6 shares a similar function 
with Gra2, in that it is rapidly targeted to a network of membranous tubules
that connect with the vacuolar membrane [3]. Indeed, these two proteins,
together with Gra4, form a multimeric complex that stabilises the parasite
within the vacuole [3].

DENSEGRNULE6 is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the dense granule Gra6 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment (~190 amino acids).
Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 9 sequences was identified.
