PENKBPRCRSR
Vertebrate endogenous opioid neuropeptides are released by post-transla-
tional proteolytic cleavage of precursor proteins. The precursors consist of
the following components: a signal sequence that precedes a conserved region
of about 50 residues; a variable-length region; and the sequence of the
neuropeptide itself. Three types of precursor are known: preproenkephalin A
(gene PENK), which is processed to produce 6 copies of Met-enkephalin, plus
Leu-enkephalin; preproenkephalin B (gene PDYN), which is processed to
produce neoendorphin, dynorphin, leumorphin, rimorphin and Leu-enkephalin;
and prepronocipeptin (gene PNOC), whose processing produces nociceptin
(orphanin FQ) and two other potential neuropeptides.

Sequence analysis reveals that the conserved N-terminal region of the
precursors contains 6 cysteines, which are probably involved in disulphide
bond formation. It is speculated that this region might be important for 
neuropeptide processing [1].

The primary structure of porcine preproenkephalin B has been elucidated and
shown to contain neoendorphin, dynorphin and leumorphin (containing 
rimorphin as its N-terminus). These opioid peptides, each having a Leu-
enkephalin structure, act on the kappa-receptor. The sequence similarity
observed between preproenkephalin B and preproenkephalin A, coupled with the
similarity between their gene organisations, suggests that the two genes
have been generated from a common ancestor by gene duplication [3]. 

PENKBPRCRSR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
proenkephalin B precursor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that 
characterise the proenkephalin B precursors but distinguish them from the
rest of the opioid neuropeptide precursor family - motifs 1 lies in the
signal sequence; motifs 2 and 3 reside within the N-terminal Cys-rich region
encoded by PROSITE pattern OPIOIDS_PRECURSOR (PS01252), falling between the 
third and fourth, and fifth and sixth conserved Cys residues respectively;
motifs 4 and 5 lie within the variable region; and motifs 6 and 7 span the
dynorphin and leumorphin peptides respectively. Two iterations on OWL30.2
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 7
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
