LCACHANNELB1
Calcium channels are generally discriminated by their biophysical and/or
pharmacological sensitivity. L-type calcium channels are distinguished by
their modulation by compounds such as dihydropyridines. These channels
tend to be localised mainly around the neuronal cell body, where they
influence calcium-dependent modulation and excitation-transcription coupling,
but are also found in skeletal and cardiac muscle, where they play a role in
excitation-contraction coupling and action potential shaping, respectively.

L-type calcium channnels are formed from different alpha-1 subunit isoforms
that determine the pharmacological properties of the channel, since they
form the drug binding domain. Other properties, such as gating voltage-
dependence, G protein modulation and kinase susceptibility, are influenced 
by alpha-2, delta and beta subunits [1].

Co-expression of beta subunit mRNA with alpha-1 subunit mRNA in xenopus
oocytes produces increased calcium currents, which are accompanied by a
shift in the voltage-dependence of activation to more negative membrane
potentials. Conversely, microinjection of antisense oligonucleotides to 
beta subunit mRNA produces decreased calcium currents and shifts voltage-
dependent activation to more positive membrane potentials. There are
four distinct beta subunits: beta-1, beta-2, beta-3 and beta-4; and the
magnitude of these effects varies with the particular subtype [2].

There are 3 splice variants of the beta-1 subunit: beta-1a, beta-1b and beta
1c. Beta-1a is the most extensively studied of these and is known to be 
expressed in skeletal muscle and brain, but not in smooth muscle or heart.
Beta-1a appears to be important for the functional expression of the alpha-1
subunit in skeletal muscle. It is a 524-residue peripheral membrane protein 
that associates with a conserved 9-residue motif between repeats I and II 
of the alpha-1 subunit [3]. Beta-1b was identified by cloning in rat brain, 
heart and hippocampus, and differs from beta-1a by having a deletion of ~50
amino acids at residue 209, and having a 120-residue C-terminal elongation.
Beta-1c was cloned from human heart and hippocampus and has the same
deletion as beta-1b, but lacks the C-terminal extension.

LCACHANNELB1 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
L-type calcium channel beta-1 subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise the beta-1 subunits but distinguish them from 
the rest of the L-type calcium channel beta subunits. Two iterations on
SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 10 sequences was identified.
