GROUCHOFAMLY
The Groucho (Gro)/transducin-like enhancers (TLE) are a family of
evolutionarily conserved corepressor proteins that play a critical role in
diverse developmental and cellular pathways, including lateral inhibition,
segmentation, sex determination, dorsal/ventral pattern formation, terminal
pattern formation, and eye development [1]. 

The Gro/TLE family contain two highly conserved domains, a C-terminal
WD-repeat domain and an N-terminal glutamine rich (Q) domain, in addition
to a variable central region. The highly conserved Q domains are unique to
the Gro/TLE family and are not found in other WD-repeat proteins. The
variable region contains a loosely conserved CcN motif, consisiting of 
putative cdc2 kinase (cdc2) and casein kinase II (CKII) phosphorylation 
sites, as well as a nuclear localisation signal [2]. The CcN motif is 
flanked by two poorly conserved regions, which are characteristically rich 
in either glycine and proline or serine and proline residues, GP and SP 
domains respectively.

Gro/TLE family proteins do not bind to DNA directly as they lack any
DNA-binding domain. However, they are recruited to the template by DNA-bound
repressor proteins. Gro/TLE corepressors assemble into high order oligomeric
structures [3] through their conserved Q domain - the Q domains are able to
mediate both homo- and hetero-oligomerisation. The GP domain is able to
recruit histone deacetylase to the template; this, together with other
findings, shows that Gro/TLE proteins specifically associate with histones,
and suggests that Gro/TLE corepressors negatively regulate transcription by
inducing a silenced chromatin structure.

GROUCHOFAMLY is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Groucho/transducin-like enhancer proteins. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 15 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the
C-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 lies between WD-repeats 4 and 
5; motifs 2 and 3 span WD-repeat 5; and motifs 4 and 5 span WD-repeat 6.
Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 20 sequences was identified.
