TNFACTORR14
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 14 is also known as herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM). It plays
an important role in the entry of herpes simplex virus into cells, and hence
pathogenesis of the virus [7].

TNFACTORR14 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 14. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in
the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise TNF receptor 14 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - all motifs lie in the extracellular N-terminal region. Two 
iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 11 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were
also found, B4DU65_HUMAN and B4E0P6_HUMAN, both which are translated human
cDNA sequences that fail to match motif 4.
