FADG3PDH
FAD-dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH; EC 1.1.99.5) is
involved in glycerol metabolism. Insulin exposure often stimulates G3PDH
activity [1,2], and thus is key to reducing the effects of the disease
diabetes. In obese people, where insulin resistance has been demonstrated,
the amount of G3PDH has been shown to be correspondingly lower than
that in normal weight people [1].

G3PDH catalyses the conversion of glycerol-3-phosphate into dihydroxy-
acetone phosphate:

   sn-glycerol-3-phosphate	      glycerone phosphate
	     +		       =	       +
	  acceptor			reduced acceptor

In bacteria, G3PDH is associated with the utilisation of glycerol coupled
to respiration. In E.coli and H.influenzae, there are two isoforms of the
enzyme; one that operates in aerobic conditions and another that is 
specially adapted to work in anaerobic conditions.

In eukaryotes, the enzyme is generally found in the mitochondria, where, in
concert with an NAD-dependent cytoplasmic GPD, it is involved in a process
termed the glycerol-phosphate shuttle. This mechanism is responsible for
the preservation of a redox balance [3,4]. In this environment, the enzyme
has been recorded to increase activity in the presence of calcium [5].

G3PDH is a protein of ~60-70kDa that contains a probable FAD-binding domain
at its N-terminal extremity. The mammalian enzyme differs from the bacterial
or yeast proteins by housing a C-terminal EF-hand calcium-binding region.

FADG3PDH is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
FAD-dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase family. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from short conserved regions, mainly in the N-terminal portion of the
alignment - motifs 1 and 2 include the region encoded by PROSITE pattern 
FAD_G3PDH_1 (PS00977); and motif 6 spans part of the region encoded by 
PROSITE pattern FAD_G3PDH_2 (PS00978). Two iterations on OWL30.2 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 15
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of
which are fragments or homologues that fail to match one or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
