5HT3BRECEPTR
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) is widely distributed in both the
central and peripheral nervous system, where it acts as a neurotransmitter
and neuromodulator [1]. It has been implicated in several aspects of brain
function, including regulation of affective states, ingestive behavior and
addiction. 5-HT can activate a number of different receptor subtypes that
produce diverse neuronal responses, principally through activation of
G-protein-mediated signalling pathways. Signalling through the 5-HT3
receptor (5-HT3R) differs, since this subtype belongs to the ligand-gated
ion channel (LGIC) superfamily, which also includes the inhibitory
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A and glycine receptors, and excitatory
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) [2]. 5-HT3 receptor function has
been implicated in a variety of neural processes, including pain perception,
emesis, anxiety and drug abuse.

Like the other members of the LGIC superfamily, the 5HT3R exhibits a high
degree of sequence similarity, and therefore putative structural similarity,
with nAChRs [3]. Thus, funtional 5HT3Rs comprise a pentamer: the ion channel
is formed at the centre of a rosette formed between five homologous
subunits. Two classes of 5-HT3R subunit are currently known, termed 5-HT3A
and 5-HT3B. The proposed topology of 5-HT3R subunits comprises four putative
transmembrane (TM) domains (designate M1-4); a large extracellular
N-terminal region (~200 amino acids); and a variable cytoplasmic loop 
between M3 and M4. The M2 domains from each subunit are thought to form the
channel pore [4]. The agonist binding site is formed by the N-terminus,
which, on binding, induces a conformational change in the channel pore, a
process often referred to as "gating" [4]. Opening of the pore allows cation
flux through the neuronal membrane and depolarises the membrane potential.
Thus, 5-HT3Rs may be thought of as excitatory receptors [5].

Whilst it was initially thought that 5-HT3Rs comprised a homopentamer of
alpha subunits, the channel conductance and permeability to anions was
different in homomeric receptors from that observed in native channels. More
recently, another 5-HT3 receptor subunit, 5-HT3B, was identified and cloned
from a human brain cDNA library [7]. This subunit was unable to form
functional channels when expressed alone in oocytes, but produced functional
receptors when injected with 5-HT3A into the same cell. It is thought that
5HT3B contributes towards tissue-specific functional changes in
5-HT3-mediated signalling [8].

5HT3BRECEPTR is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 5-HT3B
receptor subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the 
5-HT3B receptor subunits but distinguish them from 5-HT3A receptors - motifs
1 and 2 reside within the N-terminal domain; and motif 3 lies in the 
variable cytoplasmic loop between TM domains M3 and M4. Two iterations on 
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 3 sequences was identified.                             
