WIFPROTEIN
Wnt proteins constitute a large family of secreted molecules that are
involved in intercellular signalling during development. The name derives
from the first 2 members of the family to be discovered: int-1 (mouse) and
wingless (Drosophila) [1]. It is now recognised that Wnt signalling controls
many cell fate decisions in a variety of different organisms, including
mammals [2]. Wnt signalling has been implicated in tumorigenesis, early
mesodermal patterning of the embryo, morphogenesis of the brain and kidney,
regulation of mammary gland proliferation, and Alzheimer's disease [3,4].

Wnt-mediated signalling is believed to proceed initially through binding to
cell surface receptors of the frizzled family; the signal is subsequently
transduced through several cytoplasmic components to B-catenin, which enters
the nucleus and activates the transcription of several genes important in
development [5]. More recently, however, several non-canonical Wnt
signalling pathways have been elucidated that act independently of
B-catenin [6]. Members of the Wnt gene family are defined by their sequence
similarity to mouse Wnt-1 and Wingless in Drosophila. They encode proteins
of ~350-400 residues in length, with orthologues identified in several,
mostly vertebrate, species. Very little is known about the structure of 
Wnts as they are notoriously insoluble; in terms of primary structure, the
family is characterised by a signal sequence and an almost invariant pattern
of 23-24 conserved cysteines [1]. Fifteen major Wnt gene families have been 
identified in vertebrates, with multiple subtypes within some classes.

Whilst different Wnt genes show a characteristic pattern of spatial 
expression, many tissues express a combination of Wnt subtypes. Furthermore,
individual Wnt polypeptides show varying affinities for different frizzled 
receptor subtypes, which are themselves expressed in a highly tissue-
dependent manner. As a result, Wnt proteins are able to elicit specific 
biological responses that are distinct from other Wnt family members [1].

Wnt inhibitory factor-1 (WIF-1) is a secreted protein that binds to Wnt 
proteins and inhibits their activities. It was first identified as an EST 
from human retina; ortholgues have since been identified in mouse, rat, 
Xenopus and zebrafish. WIF-1 proteins comprise an N-terminal signal 
sequence, a family-specific WIF domain, five epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
repeats and a hydrophilic C-terminus. The interaction of Wnt proteins with 
WIF-1 and other inhibitors, such as frizzled-related protein, is thought to 
fine tune their activity [7].

WIFPROTEIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the WIF-
1 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4 
sequences: motifs 1-5 lie within the WIF domain. Two iterations on 
SPTR40_22f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 6 sequences was identified. 
