EPMEMFAMILY
The epithelial membrane proteins (EMP-1, -2 and -3), peripheral myelin 
protein 22 (PMP22), and lens fiber membrane intrinsic protein (LMIP)
comprise a protein family on the basis of sequence and structural 
similarities [1]. Each family member is a small hydrophobic membrane
glycoprotein, ~160-170 amino acids in length, and shares a common predicted
transmembrane (TM) topology of 4 TM domains, with intracellular N- and 
C-termini [2]. 

Roles for the EMP/PMP22/LMIP family members in cell structure and growth
and have been proposed [1]. PMP22 is a structural component of compact
myelin in the peripheral nervous system. It has also been implicated in the
control of cell proliferation. PMP22 expression levels are up-regulated in
cultured cells undergoing growth arrest [1], and modulation of PMP22 levels
in cultured Schwann cells exerts a profound effect on the length of the G1
phase of the cell cycle [3]. In contrast, EMP-1, which is co-expressed with
PMP22 in a range of tissues, displays an inverse pattern of regulation.
EMP-1 expression levels are high in proliferating cells and can be
down-regulated by inducing growth arrest [4]. It has therefore been
proposed that these proteins may perform reciprocal roles in the control of
cell quiescence and proliferation. Although the function of LMIP has not
been elucidated, its extremely high expression level in the mammalian eye
lens suggests it may perform a tissue specific role [5].

EPMEMFAMILY is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
epithelial membrane protein (EMP/PMP22/LMIP) family. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 15 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved loop and TM regions, focusing on those sections that
characterise the EMP/PMP22/LMIP family - motif 1 lies in TM domain 2; motif 
2 spans part of the intracellular loop and part of TM domain 3; motif 3 
resides within TM domain 3; and motif 4 lies in TM domain 4. Two iterations
on SPTR39_14f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 16 sequences was identified. A single partial match was also 
found, Q9TQZ3, a preliminary partial bovine sequence that is highly similar
to PMP22.
