PROXISOMEPAR
Steroid or nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) constitute an important super-
family of transcription regulators that are involved in widely diverse 
physiological functions, including control of embryonic development, cell
differentiation and homeostasis [1]. Members of the superfamily include the
steroid hormone receptors and receptors for thyroid hormone, retinoids, 
1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3 and a variety of other ligands. The proteins 
function as dimeric molecules in nuclei to regulate the transcription of 
target genes in a ligand-responsive manner [2,3]. In addition to C-terminal
ligand-binding domains, these nuclear receptors contain a highly-conserved,
N-terminal zinc-finger that mediates specific binding to target DNA 
sequences, termed ligand-responsive elements. In the absence of ligand,
steroid hormone receptors are thought to be weakly associated with nuclear
components; hormone binding greatly increases receptor affinity.

NRs are extremely important in medical research, a large number of them
being implicated in diseases such as cancer, diabetes, hormone resistance
syndromes, etc. [1]. While several NRs act as ligand-inducible transcription
factors, many do not yet have a defined ligand and are accordingly termed 
"orphan" receptors. During the last decade, more than 300 NRs have been
described, many of which are orphans, which cannot easily be named due to 
current nomenclature confusions in the literature. However, a new system 
has recently been introduced in an attempt to rationalise the increasingly 
complex set of names used to describe superfamily members [1].

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) are ligand-activated
transcription factors that belong to the nuclear hormone receptor 
superfamily. Three cDNAs encoding PPARs have been isolated from Xenopus
laevis: xPPAR alpha, beta and gamma [4]. All three xPPARs appear to be
activated by both synthetic peroxisome proliferators and naturally occurring
fatty acids, suggesting a common mode of action for all members of this 
subfamily of receptors [4]. Furthermore, the multiplicity of the receptors
suggests the existence of hitherto unknown cellular signalling pathways for
xenobiotics and putative endogenous ligands [5]. 

PROXISOMEPAR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise the PPAR family but distinguish it from the
rest of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie 
C-terminal to the zinc finger domain; and motifs 3-7 span the putative
ligand-binding domain. Three iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 19 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, the Xenopus beta
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor, PPAS_XENLA, which fails to
match the first motif. 
