TNFALPHA
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) (or cachectin) is a monocyte-derived cytotoxin
that has been implicated in tumour regression, septic shock and cachexia
[1,2]. The protein is synthesised as a prohormone with an unusually long 
and atypical signal sequence, which is absent from the mature secreted
cytokine [3]. A short hydrophobic stretch of amino acids serves to anchor 
the prohormone in lipid bilayers [4]. Both the mature protein and a 
partially-processed form of the hormone are secreted after cleavage of the
propeptide [4]. 

The structure of TNF has been determined to 2.9A using X-ray crystallography
[5]. The protein is trimeric, each subunit consisting of an anti-parallel
beta-sandwich. The subunits trimerise via a novel edge-to-face packing of
beta-sheets [5]. Comparison of the subunit fold with that of other proteins
reveals similarity to the 'jelly-roll' structural motif characteristic of
viral coat proteins [5]. It is believed that each TNF molecule has three 
receptor-interaction sites (between the three subunits), thus allowing
signal transmission by receptor clustering [6]. 

TNF-alpha is a soluble cytokine with a wide variety of functions: it causes
damage to tumour cells but has no effect on normal cells; it is involved in 
the induction of cachexia; it is a potent pyrogen, causing fever by direct
action or by stimulation of interleukin-1 secretion; and it can stimulate
cell proliferation and induce cell differentiation under certain conditions.

TNFALPHA is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour 
necrosis factor alpha. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise TNF-alpha but distinguish it from the rest of the TNF family -
motifs 1-3 were drawn from the N-terminal region; motif 4 spans beta-strands
2 and 3; motif 5 encodes the N-terminus of strnd 9; and motif 6 spans strand
10 and helix 1. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 22 sequences was 
identified.
