ADHESINMAFB
The pathogenic neisseriae are a small group of virulent bacteria that 
initiate infection at the human host mucosal membranes [1]. They are Gram- 
negative cocci and usually exist in pairs. N.gonorrhoeae is passed through 
sexual transmission and can cause renal failure in extreme cases. The more
extreme N.meningitidis is a usually commensal nasopharynx microbe that 
causes meningococcemia and acute bacterial meningitis, especially in young 
children and teenagers [1]. There are several serogroups, of which types 
A, B and C are the most virulent. Despite recent advances in vaccinology, 
this pathogen is highly important to research and still poorly understood [1].

N.meningitidis has many virulence factors, its major determinant being a 
antiphagocytic polysaccharide capsule that allows the bacterium to evade 
the host immune response [2]. Vaccines based on this polysaccharide have 
proven effective against serogroups A and C meningococci, but serogroup B
still does not possess an efficient vaccine, and causes the most severe 
form of meningitis [2]. It is believed that a conjugate protein vaccine 
derived from published neisserial genome sequences, rather than one based 
on polysaccharide, will be the best way of eradicating this disease [2].

The focus on novel vaccine targets for N.meningitidis has shifted to the 
adhesins the bacterium secretes to colonise host mucosal epithelia before a
serious infection takes hold [3]. Interaction of these adhesion molecules
with their cognate host receptors allows bacterial entry to the epithelium,
intracellular transport across the host cell, and exit into the bloodstream
on the other side [3]. Following publication of the complete genome sequence
of an N.meningitidis serogroup B strain [4], several new adhesins have been 
identified, including one identical to MafB from N.gonorrhoreae [4]. 

ADHESINMAFB is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the Neisseria meningitidis adhesin MafB family. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment. Two 
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified. 
