BCL2RLATEDA1
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death (PCD), is a common and evolutionarily 
conserved property of all metazoans [1]. In many biological processes, 
apoptosis is required to eliminate supernumerary or dangerous (e.g., pre-
cancerous) cells and to promote normal development. Thus, dysregulation  
of apoptosis can contribute to the development of many major diseases, 
including cancer, autoimmunity and neurodegenerative disorders. In most
cases, proteins of the caspase family execute the genetic programme that
leads to cell death. Bcl-2 proteins are central regulators of caspase
activation, and play a key role in cell death by regulating the integrity
of the mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum membranes [2]. At least
20 Bcl-2 proteins have been reported in mammals, and several others
have been identified in viruses.

Bcl-2 family proteins fall roughly into three subtypes, which either promote 
cell survival (anti-apoptotic) or trigger cell death (pro-apoptotic). All 
members contain at least one of four conserved motifs, termed Bcl-2 Homology
(BH) domains. Bcl-2 subfamily proteins, which contain at least BH1 and BH2,
promote cell survival by inhibiting the adapters needed for the activation
of caspases. Pro-apoptotic members potentially exert their effects by dis-
placing the adapters from the pro-survival proteins; these proteins belong
either to the Bax subfamily, which contain BH1-BH3, or to the BH3 subfamily,
which mostly only feature BH3 [3]. Thus, the balance between antagonistic
family members is believed to play a role in determining cell fate.

Members of the wider Bcl-2 family, which also includes Bcl-x, Bcl-w and 
Mcl-1, are described by their similarity to Bcl-2 protein, a member of
the pro-survival Bcl-2 subfamily [3]. The A1 subtype appears to have weaker
survival activity than Bcl-2, Bcl-x and Bcl-w, and is more divergent in 
sequence, which may indicate additional functionality. Gene knockout 
experiments in mice have shown the A1 gene to be required for survival of 
peripheral blood neutrophils [4].

BCL2RLATEDA1 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for Bcl-2-
related protein A1. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise 
Bcl-A1 proteins but distinguish them from closely-related Bcl-2 family 
members - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 resides at the N-terminal 
end of BH1; motif 3 is located at the C-terminal end of BH1; and motif 4 
is C-terminal to BH2. Two iterations on SPTR40_22f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified.
