PRESENILIN
Presenilins are polytopic transmembrane (TM) proteins, mutations in which 
are associated with the occurrence of early-onset familial Alzheimer's 
disease, a rare form of the disease that results from a single-gene
mutation [1,2]. While the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease is unresolved,
all forms are typified by a global cognitive decline and the occurrence of  
characteristic neuropathological changes. Invariably, post-mortem brains
from Alzheimer's patients contain abundant neurofibrillary tangles, together
with depositions of beta-amyloid protein as senile plaques.

The physiological functions of presenilins are unknown, but they may be 
related to developmental signalling, apoptotic signal transduction, or
processing of selected proteins, such as the beta-amyloid precursor protein
(beta-APP). That presenilin homologues have been identified in species that
do not have an Alzhemier's disease correlate suggests that they may have 
functions unrelated to the disease, homologues having been identified in
mouse, Drosophila and C.elegans [3]. In the latter, the sel-12 protein (a 
worm homologue of the mammalian presenilins) has been demonstrated to
facilitate the function of the Notch receptor, which plays a role in cell-
cell signalling during cell differentiation in development. Intriguingly,
presenilin 1 is able to restore function in a C.elegans mutant lacking
sel-12, suggesting presenilin may also be involved in cell-cell signalling
in higher species.

In humans, there are two presenilin genes (PS1 and PS2), encoding proteins
of 467 and 448 amino acids respectively. They share 67% amino acid identity,
the greatest divergence between the two falling in the N-terminus and in the
large hydrophilic loop towards the C-terminal part of each molecule. Six to
nine TM domains are predicted for each, and biochemical analysis has
demonstrated that their C-termini are cytoplasmic; but the orientation of
their N-termini and large hydrophilic loops remains to be resolved. They
are expressed in almost all tissues, including the brain and, at a cellular
level, they have been localised to the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic
reticulum and Golgi apparatus. 

To date, 45 different gene mutations have been identified in PS1, all but one
of which result in a single amino change in the presenilin 1 molecule [4].
Affected residues always occur in regions of the sequence that are conserved
between presenilins 1 and 2, and the C.elegans  homologue, sel-12. The
mutations are thought to be responsible for ~50% of cases of early-onset
familial Alzheimer's disease, in contrast, less than 1% resulting from
mutations in PS2 [5]. How the mutations trigger disease is unknown, but
one biochemical effect consistently associated with them is an alteration in
the proteolytic cleavage of beta-APP such that there is overproduction of
long-tailed beta-amyloid peptide derivatives.

PRESENILIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
presenilin family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
N-terminal two thirds of the alignment - motif 1 lies in putative TM domain
1; motif 2 lies in TM domain 6; motif 3 encodes the short loop connecting
the TM domains 6 and 7; and motif 4 lies within TM domain 7. Two iterations
on OWL31.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 25 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 19 sequences, and 5
partial matches.
