ANIONEXHNGR2
Anion exchange proteins are thought to participate in pH and cell volume
regulation. They are glycosylated, plasma-membrane transport proteins that
exchange hydrogen carbonate (HCO3-) for chloride (Cl-) in a reversible,
electroneutral manner [1,2]. To date three anion exchanger isoforms have
been identified (AE1-3), AE1 being the previously-characterised erythrocyte
band 3 protein. They share a predicted topology of 12-14 transmembrane (TM)
domains, but have differing distribution patterns and cellular localisation.
The best characterised isoform, AE1, is known to be the most abundant
membrane protein in mature erythrocytes. It has a molecular mass of ~95 kDa
and consists of two major domains. The N-terminal 390 residues form a water-
soluble, highly elongated domain that serves as an attachment site for the
binding of the membrane skeleton and other cytoplasmic proteins. The 
remainder of the protein is a 55kDa hydrophobic domain that is responsible
for catalysing anion exchange. The function of the analogous domains of AE2
and AE3 remains to be determined [3].

AE2 (~1240 amino acids) is a non-erythroid anion exchanger. It was cloned
from choroid plexus but has been detected in many organs including the
gastrointestinal tract and kidney. It is expressed in both epithelial and
non-epithelial cells, and may be present in the Golgi apparatus in addition
to the cell membrane [4]. Three AE2 N-terminal variants have been described,
arising due to the presence of alternative promoter sites within the gene. 
They are referred to as AE2a-c and have differing distribution patterns:
AE2a is expressed in all tissues; AE2b exhibits a more restricted
distribution, with highest levels in the stomach; and AE2c is expressed
only in the stomach [5].

ANIONEXHNGR2 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
anion exchanger isoform 2. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
within the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise the anion exchanger isoform 2 but distinguish it from others -
motifs 1-4 reside within the large putative cytoplasmic N-terminus. Two
iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified.
