INVTBRTCOLOR
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

A number of lipocalins act in invertebrate colouration: bilin binding
protein from the cabbage white butterfly (Pieris brassicae), the closely
related protein insecticyanin from Manduca sexta (tobacco hornworm) and the
lobster protein crustacyanin. Like other members of the family, they bind 
small molecules, and gain their colourant properties from interaction with
their ligands.

Crustacyanin (meaning 'shell blue') is the general name given to the 
carotenoprotein complex found in the epicuticle, or calcified outer layer,
of the lobster carapace [5]. It acts as the dominant pigment of the lobster 
shell, giving rise to its characteristic blue colour. In solution, 
crustacyanin exists as an equilibrium mixture between several distinct
forms, differing in their physical and spectral properties [5]. The native, 
blue form (alpha-crustacyanin), which predominates in vivo, will, at low 
ionic strength, form alpha'-crustacyanin; this in turn changes to purple
beta-crustacyanin on standing. The alpha to alpha' transition is favoured
by low ionic strength and is reversible, while conversion into beta-
crustacyanin is irreversible. Native alpha-crustacyanin is an octamer of
heterodimers, totalling 16 separate polypeptide chains, each dimer binding 
two molecules of astaxanthin, beta-crustacyanin corresponding to the free 
heterodimer.

A variety of different bilin pigments, derived from haem-breakdown products,
are distributed widely in insects. Biliverdin IXy is amongst the most common,
especially in butterfiies and moths. These pigments are usually associated
with proteins, and they contribute significantly to colouration in the
epidermis or inter-lamellar space of the wing. Two insect bilin-binding 
lipocalins have been studied in great detail: insecticyanin from the tobacco
hornworm and bilin-binding protein (BBP) from Pieris brassicae [6]. Both are
blue pigment proteins forming complexes with biliverdin IXy. The precise 
function of these proteins is unclear; apart from their role as pigments, 
it has been suggested that they may function in photoreception and 
protection from photo-induced free radicals. Many of these pigment
complexes are remarkably stable, and persist, during insect development,
from their synthesis during the larval stage, through the pupal stage 
into adulthood.

INVTBRTCOLOR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
invertebrate colouration proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the
conserved N-terminal 310 helix and the first strand (this includes the 
region encoded by PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213) and corresponds to 
the first LIPOCALIN fingerprint motif); motif 2 encodes loop L1 and the
anterior part of the second strand; motif 3 spans the posterior half
of the second strand, loop L2 and the anterior part of the third strand; 
motif 4 encodes the fifth and sixth strands and corresponds to the second
LIPOCALIN motif; motif 5, which corresponds to strand 8 and the loop
connecting it to the main C-terminal alpha-helix, is similar to the third
LIPOCALIN motif; and motif 6 spans the short strand I and flanking regions.
Two iterations on SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified. Several partial
matches were also found, all of which are related lipocalins that match
motifs 1, 4 and 5, the characteristic motifs of the lipocalin signature. 
