NRPEPTIDEWR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Two closely related neuropeptide precursors, which share no significant
sequence similarity with other known neuropeptides, have recently been
identified and named preproneuropeptide B and preproneuropeptide W [6-8]. In
humans, each precursor contains a signal sequence and two dibasic cleavage
sites. Alternative cleavage of these sites results in long (29 or 30 amino
acids) and short (23 amino acids) forms of the neuropeptides being produced
[6,7]. The mouse, rat and bovine versions of preproneuropeptide B, however,
contain only the second cleavage site, resulting in only the long form of
neuropeptide B [7,8].

Neuropeptide B is expressed in both the central nervous system (CNS) and in
the periphery. In the CNS, highest levels of the peptide are found in the
substantia nigra and hypothalamus, suggesting a possible role in locomotor
control and the release of pituitary hormones [7]. In the periphery, the
peptide is most abundant in testis, ovary, uterus, placenta, spleen, lymph
nodes and peripheral blood leukocytes, indicating potential roles in the
reproductive and immune systems [7]. Unusually, neuropeptide B purified from
bovine hypothalamus was found to be brominated at its N-terminus [8].

Neuropeptide W has a more limited distribution in the brain than
neuropeptide B and is found at highest levels in the substantial nigra,
again suggesting an involvement in locomotor control [7]. In the periphery,
neuropeptide W is more widespread than neuropeptide B. In addition to the
reproductive and immune tissues in which neuropeptide B is expressed,
neuropeptide W has been found at high levels in the liver, stomach and
trachea [7]. Intracerebroventricular administration of neuropeptide W in
rats has been reported to produce an acute increase in food intake and to
stimulate prolactin release [6].

Two orphan G protein-coupled receptors, GPR7 and GPR8 have recently been
identified as receptors for the neuropeptides [6-8]. GPR7 is expressed at
highest levels in the hippocampus, amygdala, trachea and in lung carcinoma
and at moderate levels in fetal brain, pituitary and prostate [7]. GPR8 is
most highly expressed in the caudate nucleus, hippocampus and amygdala, and
moderately expressed in the adult brain, thalamus, parietal cortex,
pituitary, adrenal gland, lymph nodes and in lymphoblastic leukemia [7].
Upon activation by neuropeptide B or W, GPR7 and GPR8 couple to pertussis
toxin-sensitive G proteins to inhibit adenylate cyclase [7].

NRPEPTIDEWR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
neuropeptide W receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within loop, TM and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the
alignment that characterise the neuropeptide W receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 is located
in the C-terminal portion of TM domain 2; motif 2 encodes the second 
cytoplasmic loop; motifs 3 and 4 span TM domain 4; motifs 5 and 6 lie in 
the second external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motif 7 resides in 
the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 8 encompasses the C-terminal portion
of TM domain 6. A single iteration on SPTR40_22f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
