CCYSTOKININR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Cholecystokinins (CCKs) and gastrins are naturally-occurring peptides that
share a common C-terminal sequence, GWMDF; full biological activity resides
in this region [6]. In the periphery, the principal physiological actions of
CCK include gall bladder contraction, pancreatic enzyme secretion and
regulation of secretion/absorption in the gastrointestinal tract [6]. In the
CNS, CCK induces analgesia, satiety and a decrease in exploratory behaviour.
In mesolimbic and mesocortical neurons, CCK coexists with dopamine [6]. It
is found throughout the digestive tract, with high concentrations in the
duodenum and jejunum. It is also found in peripheral nerves to other smooth
muscles and to secretory glands, and is one of the most abundant peptides in
the brain [6]. The principal physiological role of gastrin is to stimulate
acid secretion in the stomach; it also has trophic effects on gastric mucosa
[6]. It is found predominantly in the stomach and intestine, but also in
vagal nerves [6].

CCYSTOKININR is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cholecystokinin receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within loop, TM and C-terminal regions, focusing on those areas of the
alignment that characterise the cholecystokinin receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 encodes the
first external loop and adjacent sections of TM domains 2 and 3; motif 2
spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 3-5 reside in the N-terminal, 
central and C-terminal portions of the third cytoplasmic loop, respectively;
motif 6 is located at the C-terminus of TM domain 6; motif 7 spans the third
external loop; and motif 8 lies at the C-terminus. Two iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 18 sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also
found: these are closely related receptors from D.melanogaster (Q9VWQ9 and
Q9VWR3) and C.elegans (P91487) that may be members of the cholecystokinin 
receptor family.
