GABAAREPSLON
Gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors are members of the neuro-
transmitter ligand-gated ion channels: they mediate neuronal inhibition on
binding GABA. The effects of GABA on GABAA receptors are modulated by a range
of therapeutically important drugs, including barbiturates, anaesthetics and
benzodiazepines (BZs) [1,2]. The BZs are a diverse range of compounds,
including widely prescribed drugs, such as librium and valium, and their
interaction with GABAA receptors provides the most potent pharmacological
means of distinguishing different GABAA receptor subtypes [1].

GABAA receptors are pentameric membrane proteins that operate GABA-gated
chloride channels [3]. Eight types of receptor subunit have been cloned,
with multiple subtypes within some classes: alpha 1-6, beta 1-4, gamma 1-4,
delta, epsilon, pi, rho 1-3 and theta [4,5]. Subunits are typically 50-60kDa
in size and comprise a long N-terminal extracellular domain, containing
a putative signal peptide and a disulphide-bonded beta structural loop; 4
putative transmembrane (TM) domains; and a large cytoplasmic loop connecting
the third and fourth TM domains [2]. Amongst family members, the large
cytoplasmic loop displays the most divergence in terms of primary structure,
the TM domains showing the highest level of sequence conservation [6].

Evidence suggests that the structure of GABAA receptors is analagous to that
of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, namely a pentameric protein with
the ion channel located in the centre of a rosette formed between five 
homologous subunits [4]. The majority of receptors contain one type of alpha
and beta subunit, and a single gamma polypeptide in a ratio of 2:2:1 [1].

The epsilon subunit was first identified in 1997 using a combination of
bioinformatics-based and traditional molecular biology approaches to
identify a full-length cDNA [7]. Northern blot analysis of several human
brain tissues showed that epsilon transcripts were relatively enriched in
amygdala and thalamus, compared to whole brain, and particularly abundant in
the subthalmic nucleus. Heteromeric recombinant receptors containing the
epsilon subunit were found to be insenstitive to the potentiating effects of
anaesthetic agents.    

GABAAREPSLON is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for GABAA
receptor epsilon subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise epsilon subunits but distinguish them from the rest of the 
GABAA receptor subunit family - the motifs all reside within the large
cytoplasmic loop between TM domains 3 and 4. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6
sequences was identified.
