KV34CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].
 
Structurally, Kv channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-
gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and
3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+
channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif
that resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane spanning helices, and
forms the K+-selective pore domain [1-2].

The Kv family can be divided into 4 subfamilies on the basis of sequence
similarity and function: Shaker (Kv1), Shab (Kv2), Shaw (Kv3) and Shal 
(Kv4). All consist of pore-forming alpha subunits that associate with 
different types of beta subunit. To form a functional K+ channel pore,
4 alpha subunits and 4 beta subunits are required. The alpha subunits
have 6 well-conserved TM domains, a pore loop region and variable length
N- and C-termini. TM domains 5 and 6, and the loop region, form the K+ 
channel pore through which the K+ ions pass [3]. 

The shaw gene was first isolated from Drosophila. Several vertebrate K+
channels with similar amino acid sequences were subsequently found and,
together with the Drosophila Shaw channel, now constitute the Shaw (Kv3)
family. These channels are thought to play a role in shortening of action
potential durations and modulating pre-synaptic neurotransmitter release.
In mammals, the family consists of 4 genes (Kv3.1, Kv3.2, Kv3.3 and Kv3.4).
Each gene product has its own subcellular location and function [4].

Kv3.4 channels are expressed in cells that surround the cerebellar Purkinje
cells. In the presence of protein kinase C, rapid inactivation is eliminated,
resulting in a non-inactivating delayed rectifying current. The implications
of this are seen for signal encoding in the central nervous system [4].

KV34CHANNEL is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kv3.4 voltage-gated K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motifs 1-4 lie in the N-terminus; and 
motif 5 is situated in the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f 
was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified
beyond the starting set.
