IGFBPFAMILY3
Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs)-I and -II are small secreted peptides
that stimulate the survival, and promote the proliferation and
differentiation, of many cell types [1]. In biological fluids, these growth
factors are usually bound to IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs), which regulate
their availability and activity by prolonging their half-life and
modulating their receptor interactions.

To date, six IGFBP family members have been identified (termed IGFBP1-6)
[2]. They share a conserved gene (intron-exon) organisation and high IGF
binding affinity. Structurally, the proteins also share a common domain
architecture, possessing a conserved N-terminal IGFBP domain, a highly
variable mid-section, and a thyroglobulin type-1 (Tg1) domain in their
C-terminal regions.

In addition to their role in the regulation of IGF activity, there is
evidence for the direct association of IGFBPs with a variety of
extracellular and cell surface molecules [3,4], with consequent effects
upon important biological processes. These include modulation of bone cell
proliferation [5], and growth arrest of breast and prostate cancer cells
[3,6].

IGFBP3 is the major IGF-binding protein in serum and is expressed in many 
tissues. The protein possesses IGF-independent growth-inhibitory and 
-potentiating effects, which are mediated through specific IGFBP3 binding 
proteins/receptors [7]. In common with IGFBP5, IGFBP3 possesses a nuclear
translocation signal, and can accumulate in the nucleus, where it may exert
its growth-modulating effects [8].

IGFBPFAMILY3 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise IGFBP3 but distinguish it from other 
family members - motif 1 resides within the IGFBP domain; motifs 2 and 3
lie between the IGFBP and Tg1 domains; and motif 4 resides within the Tg1 
domain. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified. Five 
partial matches were also found (B3KRZ1_HUMAN, B3KWK7_HUMAN, B3KVY6_HUMAN,
B3KTS0_HUMAN and Q8BP94_MOUSE), all of which are human and mouse translated
cDNA sequences and IGFBP3 isoforms that fail to match motif 1.
