KV8CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].
 
Structurally, Kv channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-
gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and
3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+
channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif
that resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane spanning helices, and
forms the K+-selective pore domain [1-2].

The Kv family can be divided into 4 subfamilies on the basis of sequence
similarity and function: Shaker (Kv1), Shab (Kv2), Shaw (Kv3) and Shal 
(Kv4). All consist of pore-forming alpha subunits that associate with 
different types of beta subunit. To form a functional K+ channel pore,
4 alpha subunits and 4 beta subunits are required. The alpha subunits
have 6 well-conserved TM domains, a pore loop region and variable length
N- and C-termini. TM domains 5 and 6, and the loop region, form the K+ 
channel pore through which the K+ ions pass [3]. 

More recently, 4 new electrically-silent alpha subunits have been cloned:
Kv5 (KCNF), Kv6 (KCNG), Kv8 and Kv9 (KCNS). These subunits do not themselves
possess any functional activity, but appear to form heteromeric channels
with Kv2 subunits, and thus modulate Shab channel activity [4]. When highly
expressed, they inhibit channel activity, but at lower levels show more
specific modulatory actions. Coexpression of Kv8 subunits with Shab subunits
produces altered channel-activation kinetics that do not fit the standard
model. In addition, channel inactivation shows a shift in voltage-dependence
toward more negative potentials and a slower time course. TM domain 6 is
thought to play a key role in these modulatory effects [5].

KV8CHANNEL is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the Kv8
potassium channel alpha subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motifs 1-7 reside in
the N-terminal cytoplasmic domain; motif 8 spans the C-terminus of TM domain
6, leading into the cytoplasmic C-terminus; and motif 9 resides in the 
C-terminal domain. Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 3 sequences was identified.
