P2X7RECEPTOR
P2X purinoceptors are cell membrane ion channels, gated by adenosine
5'-triphosphate (ATP) and other nucleotides. They have been found to be
widely expressed on mammalian cells, and, by means of their functional 
properties, can be differentiated into three sub-groups. The first group is
almost equally well activated by ATP and its analogue alphabetamethyleneATP,
whereas, the second group is not activated by the latter compound. A third
type of receptor (also called P2Z) is distinguished by the fact that
repeated or prolonged agonist application leads to the opening of much
larger pores, allowing large molecules to traverse the cell membrane. This
increased permeability rapidly leads to cell death, and lysis.

Molecular cloning studies have identified seven P2X receptor subtypes,
designated P2X1-P2X7. These receptors are proteins that share 35-48% amino
acid identity, and possess two putative transmembrane (TM) domains,
separated by a long (~270 residues) intervening sequence, which is
thought to form an extracellular loop. Around 1/4 of the residues within
the loop are invariant between the cloned subtypes, including 10
characteristic cysteines.

Studies of the functional properties of heterologously expressed P2X
receptors, together with the examination of their distribution in native
tissues, suggests they likely occur as both homo- and heteromultimers
in vivo [1,2].

When the P2X7 receptor is expressed, it is found to have different
functional properties from those of P2X1-P2X6. Key properties of the current
produced are little rectification or desensitisation, and strong
potentiation of responses when the concentration of extracellular Ca2+
and/or Mg2+ are reduced. It is also found to be relatively insensitive to
ATP. In certain studies, prolonged activation of expressed P2X7 receptors
causes cell permeabilisation, and lysis, suggesting that the P2X7 receptor
may correspond to the native P2Z receptor, which responds similarly. 

P2X7RECEPTOR is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
P2X purinoceptor isoform 7. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the P2X purinoceptor isoform 7 but distinguish it from
others - motif 1 resides within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; motif
2 encodes the C-terminal half of the first TM domain; motifs 3-4 lie within
the exoplasmic loop connecting the two TM domains; and motifs 5-11 encode
portions of the putative cytoplasmic C-terminus. Two iterations on
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 3 sequences was identified.
