OMADHESIN
The genus Yersinia contains just three species: Y.enterocolita, Y.pestis, 
and Y.pseudotuberculosis [1]. Although the three use different routes to 
infect their host, each targets the lymphoid tissue for invasion, and all 
have developed specific systems to evade host immune cells [1]. PYV, a major 
virulence plasmid common to all members of this family, harbours the genes
necessary for type III secretion in the host and the exotoxins translocated 
by them. 

One of the proteins encoded within this plasmid is the Yersinia YadA 
non-fimbrial adhesin, a moiety that facilitates cell interaction between 
the host and pathogen [2]. Mutational studies indicate that this protein
allows intimate attachment and subsequent uptake by host macrophages of the 
bacterial cell. Synergistic mechanisms by two other PYV-encoded proteins,
YopH and YopE, inhibit the action of YadA. Electron microscopy of the 
mature YadA adhesins suggest that they form distinct "lollipop" shaped 
structures on the cell surface [3]. This is a trait shared by the adhesins
of another pathogen, namely Moraxella catarrhalis UspA1 and UspA2 [3]. 

The YadA protein itself exists as a homotrimer of 45kDa subunits, anchored 
in the outer bacterial membrane by its C-terminus [4]. The lollipop's 
globular head is formed by the N-terminus in the extracellular space. A
Yersinia bacterial cell thus coated with YadA can bind a number of host cell 
macromolecules, including collagen, laminin, mucus and fibronectin, 
enhancing its capacity for infection [4].

OMADHESIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Yersinia outer membrane adhesins. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment (~400 amino 
acids). A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, 
no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. A single
partial match was found, Q9ZGX0, a Yersinia hypothetical protein that failed
to match motifs 1, 2 and 5.
