CRTTRANSPORT
Neurotransmitter transport systems are integral to the release, re-uptake
and recycling of neurotransmitters at synapses. High affinity tranport
proteins found in the plasma membrane of presynaptic nerve terminals and
glial cells are responsible for the removal from the extracellular space
of released-transmitters, thereby terminating their actions [1]. Plasma
membrane neurotransmitter transporters fall into two structurally and
mechanistically distinct families. The majority of the transporters
constitute an extensive family of homologous proteins that derive energy
from the co-transport of Na+ and Cl-, in order to transport neurotransmitter
molecules into the cell against their concentration gradient. The family 
has a common structure of 12 presumed transmembrane (TM) helices and 
includes carriers for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrenaline/
adrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, proline, glycine, choline, betaine and 
taurine. They are structurally distinct from the second more-restricted
family of plasma membrane transporters, which are responsible for excitatory
amino acid tranport. The latter couple glutamate and aspartate uptake to the
co-transport of Na+ and the counter-transport of K+, with no apparent
dependence on Cl- [2]. In addition, both of these transporter families
are distinct from the vesicular neurotransmitter transporters [3,4].

Sequence analysis of the Na+/Cl- neurotransmitter superfamily reveals that
it can be divided into four subfamilies, these being transporters for
monoamines, the amino acids proline and glycine, GABA, and a group of
orphan transporters [5]. 

A Na+ and Cl- -coupled creatine transporter has been cloned from human and
rodent tissues. Initially it was mistaken for a choline transporter [6,7].
The creatine transporter species homologues are near identical (98% identity
human vs. rat and rabbit) and they are most closely related to the trans-
porters reported for taurine, GABA and betaine. Northern blot analysis of
creatine transporter distribution reveals that the highest levels of mRNA
expression are in: skeletal muscle, kidney and heart, with lower levels in
brain and other tissues. Within the brain, the highest levels were detected
in the cerebellum and hippocampus. This expression pattern correlates well
with those tissues known to possess a high creatine uptake capacity [8].

CRTTRANSPORT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
creatine transporter. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
first third of the alignment, focusing on those sections that characterise 
the creatine transporter but distinguish it from others - motif 1 resides
within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; and motifs 2-3 encode portions
of the large extracellular loop located between putative TM domains 3 and 4.
Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified.
