CD97PROTEIN
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a
manner reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to inter-
act with G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been
proposed to account for this, there is no significant sequence similarity
between these families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own
unique '7TM' signature.

CD97 is a 75-85kDa monomeric glycoprotein that is induced rapidly on the
surface of most leukocytes upon activation [6]. The mature protein contains
~722 amino acids, the C-terminal of which constitute the secretin-like 7TM 
signature. By contrast with most secretin-like receptors, CD97 has an 
extended N-terminal extracellular region (~433 amino acids) possessing
several epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains, some of which contain
calcium-binding sites, and a single Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif [6]. The 
existence of structural elements characteristic of extracellular matrix 
proteins in a 7TM molecule suggests the CD97 receptor is potentially 
involved in both adhesion and signalling processes early after leukocyte
activation [6]. 

CD97PROTEIN is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
leucocyte antigen CD97. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment if 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the N-terminal two-thirds of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise the CD97 proteins but distinguish them from
the rest of the secretin-like GPCR superfamily - motif 1 lies in the first
EGF-like domain; motif 2 spans the C-terminal half of the second EGF-like
domain; motif 3 encodes the C-terminal end of the fifth EGF-like domain;
motif 10 lies immediately N-terminal to TM domain 1; motif 11 spans the
first extracellular loop; motif 12 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; and
motif 13 resides in the third cytoplasmic loop. A single iteration on 
SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.
