LIPOCALINIMR
Lipocalin-1 (Lcn-1, tear lipocalin or von Ebners gland protein) is a member
of the lipocalin superfamily produced by a number of secretory glands and
tissues [2]. The biological relevance of the many possible activities of
Lcn-1 has still to be established, but its main function appears to be
scavenging of lipophilic, potentially harmful molecules, providing a
protection factor for cells and tissues [3]. 

Beyond its interaction with Lcn-1, the precise physiological function of
lipocalin-1 interacting membrane receptor (LIMR) is unknown. It could be
involved in the detoxification of the ligands bound to Lcn-1, either
transferring the ligand into the cell, or acting as a detoxification
protein itself, with possible enzymatic activity similar to the membrane-
associated enzymes involved in lipid molecule modification [1]. 

Currently, there is only limited data available concerning the identity of 
lipocalin receptors. While there is clear evidence for a specific receptor
for plasma retinol binding protein (RBP), there is only indirect evidence of
receptors for alpha1-microglobulin (A1M), major urinary protein (MUP), 
beta-lactoglobulin, glycodelin, insecticyanin, alpha1-acid glycoprotein 
(AGP) and odorant binding protein (OBP). There is no consensus in the
mechanism of interaction between lipocalins and their receptors. Lipocalin
receptors have been found to act via carbohydrate binding and protein-
protein interactions. With the exception of megalin, an apparent endocytic
receptor for several soluble macromolecules including some lipocalins, no
specific lipocalin receptor has so far been fully characterised [4].

LIPOCALINIMR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
lipocalin-1 interacting membrane receptors. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length. Two iterations on
SPTR39_18f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 8 sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also found:
Q9HAG9 is a human hypothetical protein that matches motifs 1-3; and Q9H5N0
is another human sequence, which matches the C-terminal two motifs.
