GDNFRALPHA2
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and its related factors
neurturin (NTN), artemin (ART) and persephin (PSP), are members of the GDNF
family of neurotrophic factors. They form a sub-group in the transforming 
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily. These factors are involved in
the promotion of neurone survival, exerting their effects through specific 
receptors.

The GDNF family receptors (GFRs) are glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol-linked,
cell surface receptors [1]. Four receptor subtypes, termed GFRalpha-1 to 4,
are currently recognised. Homologues for the GFRalpha-2 receptor subtype 
have been cloned from mammalian and avian tissue. The receptor is 
preferentially activated by neurturin, although there is evidence that 
GFRalpha-2 can also bind GDNF if pre-coupled to its effector molecule [2].

Activation of GFRalpha-2 triggers its interaction with the membrane-bound 
receptor kinase Ret. This induces Ret homo-dimerisation, triggering a 
cascade of intracellular signalling events such as the activation of the 
Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phosphpinositol-3-kinase 
(PI3K), Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and phospholipase C gamma (PLC gamma)
dependent pathways [1].

GDNFRALPHA2 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
receptor GFRalpha-2. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise GFRalpha-2 but distinguish it from other GFR isoforms -
motif 1 lies within the first globular  domain; motif 2 resides in the
second globular domain; and motifs 3 to 5 lie towards the GPI-anchor part
of the protein. A single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Two partial matches were also found, Q9Z2A2 and Q9Z2A3, which are splice
variants of the Mus musculus GFRalpha-2 lacking a portion of the N-terminal
section of the receptor.
