VDCCGAMMA1
Voltage-dependent calcium channels are a diverse family of proteins that 
encompass a variety of biological functions, including presynaptic
neurotransmitter release and protein signalling within the cell [1,2]. The
high voltage-activated channels (L-, N-, P-, Q- and R-type channels)
comprise the alpha-1 subunit, which creates the pore for the import of 
extracellular calcium ions [2]. The activity of this pore is modulated by 
four tightly-coupled subunits: an intracellular beta subunit; a
transmembrane (TM) gamma subunit; and a disulphide-linked complex of alpha-2
and delta subunits, which are proteolytically cleaved from the same gene 
product [3,4].

The voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma (VDCCG) subunit family consists 
of at least 8 members, which share a number of common structural features 
[5]. Each member is predicted to possess four TM domains, with intracellular
N- and C- termini. The first extracellular loop contains a highly conserved
N-glycosylation site and a pair of conserved cysteine residues. The 
C-terminal seven residues of VDCCG-2, -3, -4 and -8 are also conserved and 
contain a consensus site for phosphorylation by cAMP and cGMP-dependent
protein kinases, and a target site for binding by PDZ domain proteins [5].

The VDCCG-1 subunit is a 25kDa protein expressed exclusively in skeletal 
muscle cells, where it functions as a dihydropyridine-sensitive, L-type 
calcium channel subunit [6]. The modulatory properties of VDCCG-1 subunits 
have been investigated using heterologous expression systems. Coexpression
of VDCCG-1 subunits with L-type or P/Q-type channels induces moderate 
changes in activation and inactivation properties, and modification of the
peak current amplitude of these channels [7,8].

VDCCGAMMA1 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma-1 subunit proteins. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length,
focusing on those sections that characterise the VDCCG-1 subunits but 
distinguish them from other family members - motif 1 lies in the first 
extracellular loop; motif 2 spans part of the second TM domain, the
intracellular loop and part of the third TM domain; and motif 3 encodes
part of the fourth TM domain and the cytoplasmic C-terminal region. Two
iterations on SPTR39.22_17.3f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified. 
