LATPROTEIN
A key event in the regulation of the adaptive immune response is the binding
of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-peptide complexes to T cell 
antigen receptors (TCRs). The formation of such ternary complexes induces 
significant biochemical changes within T cells of the host animal. The first 
detectable response of the T cell is the rapid accumulation of numerous 
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins within the cell. Increased phosphotyrosine 
occurs as a consequence of the activation of several different TCR-
associated, hematopoietic-specific protein kinases (PTKs), thereby perturbing
the balance between those enzymes that add, and those that remove,  
phosphates from key tyrosine residues. These initial phosphorylation events 
are required for the subsequent activation of the small guanosine 
triphosphatase (GTPase) proteins Ras and Rac, the lipid kinase P13K and PLC-
gamma1. Activation of these cytoplasmic signalling proteins ultimately leads
to activation of various transcription factors (NF-AT, NF-kB, and AP-1) and
increased transcription from genes that have an important role in initiating
T cell proliferation, such as interleukin-2 (IL-2) [1,2].

An unresolved question in the field has been which molecules and what 
sequence of events tie together the early tyrosine phosphorylation events 
with the activation of these downstream signalling molecules. A likely 
candidate for linking the proximal and distal portions of the TCR signalling
pathway is a 36kDa transmembrane (TM) protein termed LAT. LAT becomes 
phosphorylated after TCR engagement, thereby creating binding sites for the 
Src homology 2 (SH2) domains of other proteins, including PLC-gamma1, Grb2,
Gads, Grap, 3BP2 and Shb. It also indirectly binds SOS, c-Cbl, Vav, SLP-76
and Itk [1].

LAT is expressed in peripheral blood lymphocytes, thymus and spleen, as
well as in other blood cells, including megakaryocytes, platelets, natural 
killer cells and mast cells. It is excluded from the cytosol, and is found 
at the plasma membrane and in the perinuclear compartment. The cellular 
localisation of LAT seems to be extremely sensitive to alternations in the 
intracellular redox balance. Reduced intracellular levels of antioxidants 
result in the membrane displacement of LAT (a consequence of a 
conformational change interfering with its insertion into the membrane), 
abrogation of TCR-mediated signalling and, consequently, hyporesponsiveness 
of T lymphocytes [1,3].

The amino acid sequence of LAT contains no recognised functional domains, 
but, consistent with its strong tyrosine phosphorylation upon TCR 
stimulation, its predicted cytoplasmic tail contains 10 tyrosines, 9 of 
which are conserved between mouse, rat and human proteins. In addition, 
LAT also has 2 cysteine residues (Cys26 and Cys29 in human) that are 
conserved among human, rat, mouse and bovine proteins. These residues lie 
proximal to the inner face of the plasma membrane: Cys26 within the TM 
region and Cys29 located juxtamembrane. These membrane-proximal residues 
are thought to play a vital role in LAT function. In fact, LAT is subject to
post-translational palmitoylation of these residues, which appears to be 
necessary to target LAT to lipid rafts in the membrane, where it can 
recruit key cytosolic signalling proteins to the aggregated rafts upon TCR 
stimulation. Raft membrane domains are envisaged as lateral assemblies of 
sphingolipids and cholesterol that form ordered membrane phases [1,2].

LATPROTEIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for LAT 
proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually 
the full alignment length - all reside in the putative cytoplasmic domain,
motifs 4 and 5 each including GRB2-binding motifs. A single iteration on 
SPTR39_17f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being 
identified beyond the starting set.
