GABAARTHETA
Gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors are members of the neuro-
transmitter ligand-gated ion channels: they mediate neuronal inhibition on
binding GABA. The effects of GABA on GABAA receptors are modulated by a range
of therapeutically important drugs, including barbiturates, anaesthetics and
benzodiazepines (BZs) [1,2]. The BZs are a diverse range of compounds,
including widely prescribed drugs, such as librium and valium, and their
interaction with GABAA receptors provides the most potent pharmacological
means of distinguishing different GABAA receptor subtypes [1].

GABAA receptors are pentameric membrane proteins that operate GABA-gated
chloride channels [3]. Eight types of receptor subunit have been cloned,
with multiple subtypes within some classes: alpha 1-6, beta 1-4, gamma 1-4,
delta, epsilon, pi, rho 1-3 and theta [4,5]. Subunits are typically 50-60kDa
in size and comprise a long N-terminal extracellular domain, containing
a putative signal peptide and a disulphide-bonded beta structural loop; 4
putative transmembrane (TM) domains; and a large cytoplasmic loop connecting
the third and fourth TM domains [2]. Amongst family members, the large
cytoplasmic loop displays the most divergence in terms of primary structure,
the TM domains showing the highest level of sequence conservation [6].

Evidence suggests that the structure of GABAA receptors is analagous to that
of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, namely a pentameric protein with
the ion channel located in the centre of a rosette formed between five 
homologous subunits [4]. The majority of receptors contain one type of alpha
and beta subunit, and a single gamma polypeptide in a ratio of 2:2:1 [1].

Identification and characterisation of the theta subunit was first reported
in 1999 [5]. Cloning of the full-length cDNA was performed using a human
whole-brain library, yielding a deduced open reading frame of 627 amino
acids. This polypeptide was found to be most similar to the beta 1 subunit
with regard to sequence identity, and was able to co-assemble with alpha 2,
beta 1 and gamma 1 subunits, yielding heteromeric assemblies with a 4-fold
increase in sensitivity towards GABA. Furthermore, theta mRNA was found 
to have a unique spatial distribution, with significant expression within
monoaminergic neurons of both human and monkey brain.      

GABAARTHETA is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for GABAA
receptor theta subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise theta subunits but distinguish them from the rest of the GABAA
receptor subunit family - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; and motifs 2-5
reside within the large cytoplasmic loop between TM domains 3 and 4. A
single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.  
