IGHEPTARCPTR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a
manner reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to inter-
act with G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been
proposed to account for this, there is no significant sequence similarity
between these families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own
unique '7TM' signature.

A novel member of the secretin-like family of GPCRs has been cloned and
named Ig-hepta, due to the presence of two immunoglobulin-like repeats
in its large extracellular domain [6]. The receptor is expressed
predominantly in the lung, this expression being strongly induce
postnatally. Biochemical analysis indicates that Ig-hepta is heavily
glycosylated and exists as a disulphide-linked dimer. The receptor appears
to be localised in alveolar walls of the lungs and intercalated cells of the
kidney collecting ducts, suggesting a role in regulation of acid-base
balance [6].

IGHEPTARCPTR is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Ig-hepta receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the Ig-hepta receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the secretin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the N-terminus of 
the extracellular domain; motifs 3-5 span the central portion of the 
extracellular domain, between the two Ig-like domains; motifs 6 and 7 lie
between the second Ig-like domain and TM domain 1; motifs 8 and 9 span the
first and second cytoplasmic loops, respectively; motif 10 encodes the
second external loop; motif 11 spans the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs
12 and 13 reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR40_18f was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.
