FIMBRIALPAPF
The Gram-negative pathogen Escherichia coli causes several common bacterial 
illnesses in humans, including diarrhoea, neonatal meningitidis and urinary 
tract infections. Attachment to host tissues is essential for successful 
invasion, and requires interaction between a bacterial adhesive protein and 
its target receptor. This protein is usually supported on a larger structure 
made up of heteropolymeric fibres [1]. Pyelonephritogenic E.coli
specifically invade the uroepithelium by expressing 100-300 pili on their
cell surface. Pili are macromolecular structures that allow binding to a
digalactoside receptor in the urinary tract. 

P pili, or fimbriae, are ~68A in diameter and 1 micron in length, the
bulk of which is a fibre composed of the main structural protein PapA [1].
At its tip, the pilus is terminated by a fibrillum consisting of repeating
units of the PapE protein. This, in turn, is topped by the adhesins, PapF
and PapG, both of which are needed for receptor binding. The tip fibrillum
is anchored to the main PapA fibre by the PapK pilus-adaptor protein. PapH,
an outer membrane protein, then anchors the entire rod in the bacterial
envelope [2]. A cytoplasmic chaperone (PapD) assists in assembling the 
monomers of the macromolecule in the membrane [3]. 

PapF, in addition to aiding in the virulence and binding of uropathogenic 
E.coli, also functions as an adapter protein that joins the distal end of 
the tip fibrillum to the main PapG adherence factor. By providing a 
complementary binding surface for PapE and PapG, pilus assembly is rapidly
completed [4]. 

FIMBRIALPAPF is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Escherichia coli P pili tip fibrillum PapF protein family. The fingerprint 
was derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length. A single
iteration on SPTR40_18f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. 
