DNAGYRASEB
Topoisomerases catalyse the interconversion of topological isomers of DNA
and play a key role in DNA metabolism [1]. Topoisomerase I catalyses an ATP-
independent reaction, while topoisomerase II catalyses an ATP-dependent
reaction, resulting in the formation of DNA supercoils [1-3]. The supercoil
is formed by transient cleavage in both strands of double-stranded DNA,
followed by the passage of a segment of DNA through the break, and break
ligation [3]. Eukaryotic enzymes can form both positive and negative
supercoils, while prokaryotic enzymes form only negative supercoils.

Eukaryotic topoisomerase II exists as a homodimer; in bacteriophage T4 it 
consists of 3 heterologous subunits; in prokaryotes it exists as a tetramer
of 2 subunits (2 each of gyrA and gyrB); and in E.coli, a second type II
topoisomerase, involved in chromosome segregation (topoisomerase IV),
consists of 2 subunits (parC and parE). GyrB, parE, and the product of 
bacteriophage T4 gene 39, are all similar to the eukaryotic proteins [1-3].

DNA gyrase is the target of two classes of inhibitor: coumarins and
quinolones. Coumarins bind to gyrB and are competitive inhibitors with
respect to ATP. Quinolones bind DNA gyrase when the enzyme is complexed
with DNA, and trap the enzyme in an abortive ternary complex.

The crystal structure of an N-terminal fragment of the Escherichia coli DNA
gyrase B in complex with a non-hydrolysable ATP analogue, has been
determined to 2.5A resolution [3]. The fold comprises two domains, both of
which exhibit novel topologies. The fragment forms a dimer, whose N-terminal
domains are responsible for ATP binding and hydrolysis [3]. The C-terminal
domains form the sides of a 20A hole through the protein dimer, which may
play a role in DNA strand passage during the supercoiling reaction [3].

DNAGYRASEB is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for DNA
gyrase B. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise DNA
gyrase B but distinguish it from the rest of the topoisomerase II family -
motif 2 encodes helix 6; and motif 3 encodes beta strand 8. Four iterations
on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 30 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are related members of the topoisomerase II family,
including topoisomerase IV B, the sequence of which is virtually 
indistinguishable from DNA gyrase B.
