MELATONIN1CR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Melatonin is secreted by the pineal gland during darkness [6]. It regulates
a variety of neuroendocrine functions and is thought to play an essential
role in circadian rhythms [6]. Drugs that modify the action of melatonin,
and hence influence circadian cycles, are of clinical interest (for example,
in the treatment of jet-lag) [6]. Melatonin receptors are found in the 
retina, in the pars tuberalis of the pituitary, and in discrete areas of 
the brain. The receptor inhibits adenylyl cyclase via a pertussis-toxin-
sensitive G protein, probably of the Gi/Go class [6]. 

Three sub-types have been cloned, designated Mel1a, Mel1b and Mel1c,
together with a closely related orphan receptor, termed Mel1x. Chick brain
and Xenopus Mel1c receptors are 80% identical and are distinct from the 
Mel1a and Mel1b subtypes [7]. Similar ligand binding and functional 
characteristics are observed in expressed Mel1a and Mel1c receptors [7].
The widespread distribution of Mel1a and Mel1c mRNA in brain provides a
molecular substrate for the profound actions of melatonin in birds [7]. 

MELATONIN1CR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
melatonin 1C receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the melatonin 1C receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the melatonin receptor family - motif 1 resides at the N-terminus;
motif 2 lies in the N-terminal portion of TM domain 1; motif 3 spans the 
third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs 4 and 5 reside at the C-terminus. A 
single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. A single partial match
was found, a melatonin 1A receptor that matches motifs 2 and 5.
