TRHRECEPTOR2
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (thyroliberin) (TRH) stimulates synthesis and
release of thyroid-stimulating hormone in the anterior pituitary [6]. It
also stimulates synthesis and release of prolactin. In the CNS, TRH
stimulates a number of behavioural and pharmacological actions, including
increased turnover of catecholamines in the nucleus accumbens [6]. 

A second receptor for thyrotropin-releasing hormone has been identified [7].
TRHR2 is expressed in the brain and spinal cord, with highest levels in the
pontine nucleus, thalamus and cerebellar cortex. Moderate expression was
also found in the anterior olfactory nucleus, neocortex, superior and
inferior colliculi, central grey and in several other brainstem nuclei. In
contrast to TRHR1, no expression was found in the pituitary. In the spinal
cord, TRHR2 expression was detected only in the dorsal horn [7]. The
distribution of TRHR2 suggests a role for the receptor in somatosensory,
antinociceptive and motor functions. Binding of TRH to the receptor leads to
activation of phospholipase C through coupling to Gq proteins [7].

TRHRECEPTOR2 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor 2. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
sections within N- and C-terminal and loop regions, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the type 2 thyrotropin-releasing hormone
receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the thyrotropin-releasing
hormone receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus; motif 3
spans the first external loop; motif 4 lies in the second cytoplasmic loop;
motif 5 encodes the second external loop; and motif 6 is located in the
C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified.
