NOTCH1
Notch cell surface receptors are large, single-pass type-1 transmembrane
proteins found in a diverse range of metazoan species, from human to
Caenorhabditis species. The fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, possesses
only one Notch protein, whereas in C.elegans, two receptors have been found;
by contrast, four Notch paralogues (designated N1-4) have been identified in
mammals, playing both unique and redundant roles.

The hetero-oligomer Notch comprises a large extracellular domain (ECD),
containing 10-36 tandem Epidermal Growth Factor (EFG)-like repeats, which
are involved in ligand interactions; a negative regulatory region,
including three cysteine-rich Lin12-Notch Repeats (LNR); a single trans-
membrane domain (TM); a small intracellular domain (ICD), which includes a
RAM (RBPjk-association module) domain; six ankyrin repeats (ANK), which are
involved in protein-protein interactions; and a PEST domain. Drosophila 
Notch also contains an OPA domain [1]. 	 

Notch signalling is an evolutionarily conserved pathway involved in a wide
variety of developmental processes, including adult homeostasis and stem 
cell maintainance, cell proliferation and apoptosis [2]. Notch is activated
by a range of ligands - the so-called DSL ligands (Delta/Seratte/LAG-2). 
Activation is also mediated by a sequence of proteolytic events: ligand
binding leads to cleavage of Notch by ADAM proteases [3] at site 2 (S2) and
presenilin-1/g-secretase at sites 3 (S3)and 4 (S4) [4].The last cleavage
releases the Notch intracellular part of the protein (NICD) from the
membrane and, upon release, the NICD translocates to the nucleus where it
associates with a CBF1/RBJk/Su(H)/Lag1 (CSL) family of DNA-binding proteins.
The subsequent recruitment of a co-activator mastermind like (MAML1) protein
[5] promotes transcriptional activation of Notch target genes: well 
established Notch targets are the Hes and Hey gene families.  
   
Aberrant Notch function and signalling has been associated with a number of
human disorders, including Allagile syndrome, spondylocostal dysostosis,
aortic valve disease, CADASIL (Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with
Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy), and T-cell Acute Lympho-
blastic Leukemia (T-ALL); it has also been implicated in various human
carcinomas [6,7].

Notch 1 has a widespread pattern of expression and has been demonstrated
to be involved in several processes such as mesenchymal cell differentiation,
spermatogenesis, and osteoblastic cell differentiation. The pattern of 
expression of Notch 1 in adult human tissues reveals that this receptor
may play multiple roles in several cell types, including neurons, lymphoid
cells and skeletal muscle cells, as well as suprabasal cells in stratified
epithelia [8]. 

NOTCH1 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for neurogenic
locus Notch protein 1. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 lies between the EGF repeat 
and LNR regions and is unique to Notch 1 proteins; motif 2 lies in a
conserved area C-terminal to the LNR region; motif 3 lies N-terminal to the 
TM domain; motif 4 resides in an area C-terminal to the ankyrin repeat
region; and motif 5 is close to the protein C-terminus. Two iterations on
SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 14 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also 
identified: B5UQW5_ONCMY and 093616_DANRE, which are Notch protein fragments
that are missing parts of the sequence bearing 2 or 3 motifs.
