ORPHTRNSPORT
Neurotransmitter transport systems are integral to the release, re-uptake
and recycling of neurotransmitters at synapses. High affinity tranport
proteins found in the plasma membrane of presynaptic nerve terminals and
glial cells are responsible for the removal from the extracellular space
of released-transmitters, thereby terminating their actions [1]. Plasma
membrane neurotransmitter transporters fall into two structurally and
mechanistically distinct families. The majority of the transporters
constitute an extensive family of homologous proteins that derive energy
from the co-transport of Na+ and Cl-, in order to transport neurotransmitter
molecules into the cell against their concentration gradient. The family 
has a common structure of 12 presumed transmembrane (TM) helices and 
includes carriers for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrenaline/
adrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, proline, glycine, choline, betaine and 
taurine. They are structurally distinct from the second more-restricted
family of plasma membrane transporters, which are responsible for excitatory
amino acid tranport. The latter couple glutamate and aspartate uptake to the
co-transport of Na+ and the counter-transport of K+, with no apparent
dependence on Cl- [2]. In addition, both of these transporter families
are distinct from the vesicular neurotransmitter transporters [3,4].

Sequence analysis of the Na+/Cl- neurotransmitter superfamily reveals that
it can be divided into four subfamilies, these being transporters for
monoamines, the amino acids proline and glycine, GABA, and a group of
orphan transporters [5]. The latter is an expanding group of putative
transporters that have been cloned, but as yet have uncharacterised
substrate(s) for transport. They include NTT4 and NTT73, which were cloned
from rat brain tissues [6], and a family of alternatively-spliced variants
from kidney [7]. Sequence analysis strongly suggests that these indeed are
Na+ and Cl- -coupled cell membrane transporters, since they show significant
identity, and similar predicted topology, to the functionally-characterised
members of this superfamily.

ORPHTRNSPORT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
orphan neurotransmitter transporters. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions from the central portion of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise orphan neurotransmitter transporters but
distinguish them from others - motifs 1-2 lie within the large putative
extracellular loop located between TM domains 3 and 4; and motif 3 resides
within the putative extracellular loop between TM domains 7 and 8. Two
iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 10 sequences was identifed. Amonst these matches is
a renal organic solute transporter from rat.
