PROXISOMPABR
Steroid or nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) constitute an important super-
family of transcription regulators that are involved in widely diverse 
physiological functions, including control of embryonic development, cell
differentiation and homeostasis [1]. Members of the superfamily include the
steroid hormone receptors and receptors for thyroid hormone, retinoids, 
1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3 and a variety of other ligands. The proteins 
function as dimeric molecules in nuclei to regulate the transcription of 
target genes in a ligand-responsive manner [2,3]. In addition to C-terminal
ligand-binding domains, these nuclear receptors contain a highly-conserved,
N-terminal zinc-finger that mediates specific binding to target DNA 
sequences, termed ligand-responsive elements. In the absence of ligand,
steroid hormone receptors are thought to be weakly associated with nuclear
components; hormone binding greatly increases receptor affinity.

NRs are extremely important in medical research, a large number of them
being implicated in diseases such as cancer, diabetes, hormone resistance
syndromes, etc. [1]. While several NRs act as ligand-inducible transcription
factors, many do not yet have a defined ligand and are accordingly termed 
"orphan" receptors. During the last decade, more than 300 NRs have been
described, many of which are orphans, which cannot easily be named due to 
current nomenclature confusions in the literature. However, a new system 
has recently been introduced in an attempt to rationalise the increasingly 
complex set of names used to describe superfamily members [1].

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) are ligand-activated
transcription factors that belong to the nuclear hormone receptor 
superfamily. Three cDNAs encoding PPARs have been isolated from Xenopus
laevis: xPPAR alpha, beta and gamma [4]. All three xPPARs appear to be
activated by both synthetic peroxisome proliferators and naturally occurring
fatty acids, suggesting a common mode of action for all members of this 
subfamily of receptors [4]. Furthermore, the multiplicity of the receptors
suggests the existence of hitherto unknown cellular signalling pathways for
xenobiotics and putative endogenous ligands [5]. 

A PPAR alpha-related cDNA from mouse (designated PPAR delta, and
subsequently renamed beta) has been cloned and characterised. The alpha, 
beta and gamma PPAR isoforms display widely divergent patterns of expression
during embryogenesis and in the adult [6]. PPAR gamma and beta are not 
activated by pirinixic acid, a potent peroxisome proliferator and activator
of PPAR alpha [6]; they are, however, activated by the structurally distinct
peroxisome proliferator LY-171883 and linoleic acid, respectively, 
indicating that each isoform can act as a regulated activator of
transcription [6]. Thus tissue-specific responsiveness to peroxisome
proliferators, including certain fatty acids, may be partly a consequence
of differential expression of multiple, pharmacologically distinct PPAR
isoforms [6]. 

PROXISOMPABR is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
peroxisome proliferator-activated beta receptors. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise the beta receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the PPAR family - motif 1 lies N-terminal to the zinc 
finger domain; motifs 2 and 3 reside between the zinc fingers and the
putative ligand-binding domain; and motif 4 lies within this latter domain.
Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified. 
