SAGSUPRFAMLY
The prokaryote Staphylococcus aureus is a well-characterised and specialised 
human pathogen, expressing a variety of virulence factors to allow  
successful infection of the host [1]. Symptoms usually manifest in cases of 
food poisoning, pyrogenic fever and toxic shock syndrome, and can prove 
lethal in immunocompromised patients [1]. Of all the exotoxins secreted from 
the bacterial cell, superantigens and hemolysins are amongst the most 
studied [1]. 

Of these, the former are well characterised, and several S.aureus 
superantigenic enterotoxins exist that trigger excessive and aberrant T-cell
activation in the host. Homologues of these S.aureus proteins have been 
found in Streptococcus pyogenes, and cause similar effects [2]. In 
conventional Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)-II-restricted antigen 
processing, a peptide epitope is presented to a specific T-cell receptor 
(TCR) by the antigen presenting cell, and up to 0.0001% of the host T-cell 
repertoire is activated [2]. By contrast, a bacterial superantigen (SAg) can 
bypass this process, binding non-specifically to constant regions on both 
the MHC-II and TCR [2]. This results in up to 25% of the total host T-cell 
population being activated, with a consequent massive release of 
inflammatory cytokines. 

A recent study into the origins and functions of the S.aureus and S.pyogenes
superantigens has identified distinct protein domains that are responsible 
for the slightly different actions of each protein subgroup [3]. Based on 
these criteria, the staphylococcal and streptococcal entero/exo toxins 
discovered so far can be placed into several groups/subfamilies [3]. Apart 
from the S.aureus toxic shock syndrome toxins, which form their own 
unique group, all superantigens described so far share a common motif that 
may bind to an as yet unknown ligand. Each different subgroup also contains
a combination of domains and motifs that sets it apart [3]. However, all 
of these toxins share a similar 2-domain fold, a beta-barrel towards the
N-terminus and a beta-grasp domain towards the C-terminus [4].

SAGSUPRFAMLY is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial superantigen superfamily. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 39 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, and encompass the 
beta-grasp domain. Six iterations on SPTR44_27f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 129 sequences was 
identified. Numerous partial matches were also found - all appear to be 
family members that fail to make significant matches with one or more 
motifs.
