WNT16PROTEIN
Wnt proteins constitute a large family of secreted molecules that are
involved in intercellular signalling during development. The name derives
from the first 2 members of the family to be discovered: int-1 (mouse) and
wingless (Drosophila) [1]. It is now recognised that Wnt signalling controls
many cell fate decisions in a variety of different organisms, including
mammals [2]. Wnt signalling has been implicated in tumorigenesis, early
mesodermal patterning of the embryo, morphogenesis of the brain and kidney,
regulation of mammary gland proliferation, and Alzheimer's disease [3,4].

Wnt-mediated signalling is believed to proceed initially through binding to
cell surface receptors of the frizzled family; the signal is subsequently
transduced through several cytoplasmic components to B-catenin, which enters
the nucleus and activates the transcription of several genes important in
development [5]. More recently, however, several non-canonical Wnt
signalling pathways have been elucidated that act independently of
B-catenin [6]. Members of the Wnt gene family are defined by their sequence
similarity to mouse Wnt-1 and Wingless in Drosophila. They encode proteins
of ~350-400 residues in length, with orthologues identified in several,
mostly vertebrate, species. Very little is known about the structure of 
Wnts as they are notoriously insoluble; in terms of primary structure, the
family is characterised by a signal sequence and an almost invariant pattern
of 23-24 conserved cysteines [1]. Fifteen major Wnt gene families have been 
identified in vertebrates, with multiple subtypes within some classes.

Expression of Wnt-16 is activated by E2A-Pbx1, a fusion protein resulting 
from a t(1;19) translocation that occurs in a large proportion of pediatric 
pre-B acute lymphoblastoid leukaemias (pre-B ALL) [7]. The Wnt-16 
transcript, normally absent in bone marrow, was found to be highly expressed 
in the bone marrow of pre-B ALL patients.

WNT16PROTEIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Wnt-16 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise Wnt-16 
proteins but distinguish them from other Wnt subtypes - motif 1 lies at the 
N-terminus, within the putative signal peptide; motif 2 resides within the 
N-terminal portion, following the signal peptide; motifs 3-5 are located 
between highly conserved cysteines; and motif 6 includes conserved Cys16. A 
single iteration on SPTR40_22f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
