INTEGRINB
Integrins constitute a large family of cell surface receptors that mediate
both cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion [1,2]. They are widely expressed and
have a number of other roles that make them important therapeutic targets in
conditions such as atherosclerosis, thrombosis, cancer and asthma.

Structurally, integrins are heterodimeric associations of alpha and beta 
chains. No crystallographic data exist for the heterodimer as a whole, but
images of the gross overall structure have been obtained using electron
microscopy. Each subunit has a large globular N-terminal extracellular
domain, a single transmembrane (TM) domain, and a short C-terminal 
cytoplasmic region. The exact pairing of alpha- and beta-subunits determines
ligand specificity, localisation and function. Integrins interact with a
variety of extra-cellular matrix (ECM) proteins (such as fibronectin, 
collagen, laminin and fibrinogen) via RGD motifs in the ECM protein ligands.

At the N-terminus of the beta subunit is a cysteine-containing domain
reminiscent of that found in presenillins and semaphorins, which has hence
been termed the PSI domain. C-terminal to the PSI domain is an A-domain,
which has been predicted to adopt a Rossmann fold similar to that of the
alpha subunit, but with additional loops between the second and third
beta strands [3]. The murine gene Pactolus shares significant similarity
with the beta subunit [4], but lacks either one or both of the inserted 
loops. 

The C-terminal portion of the beta subunit extracellular domain contains
an internally disulphide-bonded cysteine-rich region, while the intra-
cellular tail contains putative sites of interaction with a variety of
intracellular signalling and cytoskeletal proteins, such as focal adhesion
kinase and alpha-actinin respectively [5].

INTEGRINB is a 14-element fingerprint that provides a signature for integrin
beta subunits. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 6
sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length - motifs 1-11 reside within the N-terminal extra-
cellular domain, motif 11 falling in the cysteine-rich region; motifs 12 
and 13 span the putative TM domain; and motif 14 lies in the cytoplasmic 
domain. Four iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 27 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are integrin beta subunits 
and homologues that fail to match one or more motifs.
