TRACEAMINER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Tyramine, beta-phenylethylamine, tryptamine and octopamine are biogenic
amines present in trace levels in mammalian nervous systems. Although some
"trace amines" have clearly defined roles as neurotransmitters in
invertebrates, the extent to which they function as true neurotransmitters
in vertebrates has remained speculative [6]. Recently, however, a novel
family of G protein-coupled receptors that share sequence similarity with
the classical amine receptors has been discovered. Members of this family
have been shown to act as receptors for tyramine and beta-phenylethylamine,
supporting a role for trace amines as neurotransmitters in vertebrates [6].

TRACEAMINER is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
trace amine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 22 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within loop
regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that characterise the
trace amine receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-
like superfamily - motif 1 encodes the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 2 spans
the first external loop; and motif 3 lies in the third external loop,
leading into TM domain 7. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 23 sequences was
identified. Two partial matches were also found, Q9YHY4 and Q9YHY3, closely
related putative odorant receptors from River lamprey that match motifs 1 
and 2.
