GALANIN2R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
paracrine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family. 

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Galanin is a neurotransmitter in the peripheral and central nervous systems
with a wide spectrum of activity [6]. In the periphery, galanin inhibits
glucose-induced insulin release and may be the sympathetic mediator of this
effect during stress. In the CNS, it inhibits firing of locus coeruleus
cells, is synergistic with opiates in inducing analgesia at the level of the
spinal cord, and stimulates feeding behaviour and release of growth hormone
[6]. Its ability to inhibit acetylcholine release in the hippocampus has led
to the suggestion that galanin antagonists may be of use in the treatment of
Alzheimer's disease. 

Galanin receptors are expressed abundantly in a wide range of CNS and
peripheral tissues, mirroring the distribution of galanin. Three receptor
subtypes have been identified, differing from one another in terms of their
expression patterns, affinity for various peptide analogues and G protein-
coupling specificity [7]. All are capable of activating K+ channels
by coupling to G proteins of the Gi/Go class [8].

The galanin 2 receptor subtype is expressed abundantly in both central and
peripheral systems. In the brain, it has been found in the hypothalamus,
amygdala, hippocampus, pyriform cortex, dendate gyrus, mammillary nuclei and
cerebellar cortex. Peripheral regions expressing the receptor include the
prostate, uterus, ovary, vas deferens, stomach, intestine, dorsal root,
pancreas, liver, heart and retina [8]. Activation of the receptor by galanin
leads to inhibition of forskolin-stimulated increase in cAMP levels,
activation of MAP kinase, and increased inositol phosphate production,
indicating that the receptor can couple to Gi, Go and Gq type G proteins.
The receptor does not appear to couple to Gs [7].

GALANIN2R is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
galanin 2 receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within the N- and
C-terminal regions and the third cytoplasmic loop, focusing on those areas
of the alignment that characterise the galanin 2 receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the galanin receptor family - motif 1 resides at the
N-terminus; motif 2 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; and motifs 3-5 span
the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39_14f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
