KIR21CHANNEL
Potassium channels are found in virtually all cell types. Their pore-
forming subunits fall into three structural families, i.e. those possessing
six, four and two transmembrane (TM) domains. The six-TM domain K+ channels
can be further subdivided into six families: the voltage-gated K+ channels
(Kv), the KCNQ channels, the eag-like K+ channels, and three Ca2+-activated
K+ channels. Inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir) are the principal class
of two-TM domain K+ channels, and the recently-discovered two-pore domain
K+ channels, make up a family of four-TM domain K+ channels.

Inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) are responsible for regulating
diverse processes including: cellular excitability, vascular tone, heart
rate, renal salt flow, and insulin release [1]. To date, around twenty
members of this superfamily have been cloned, which can be grouped into six
families by sequence similarity - these are designated Kir1.x-7.x [2,3].

Cloned Kir channel cDNAs encode proteins of between ~370-500 residues,
containing two predicted TM domains, with the characteristic K+ channel
pore-forming domain located between them. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be cytoplasmic, and the N-terminus lacks a signal sequence. It is thought
that four Kir subunits assemble to form a tetrameric channel complex, which
may be hetero- or homomeric [1].

Kir2.1 (also known as IRK1) is thought to play a role in controlling the
excitability of brain and heart tissues. Immuno-localisation studies have
revealed it to be present on many cell types within the forebrain, including
neurones, macroglia, endothelial, ependymal and vascular smooth muscle
cells. Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) is thought to interact
with Kir2.1 (as well as several other Kir subunits) via a C-terminal motif,
promoting channel activity. Recently it has been demonstrated that nicotine
can block Kir2.1 channels, this likely contributing to its ability to
promote the occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias [4].

KIR21CHANNEL is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kir2.1 inward rectifier K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from virtually the
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise
Kir2.1 but distinguish it from other subtypes - motifs 1-3 lie within the
putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; motif 4 lies between the first TM domain
and the pore-forming (H5) domain; and motifs 5-6 encode portions of the
cytoplasmic C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 10 sequences was
identified.
