GAT2TRNSPORT
Neurotransmitter transport systems are integral to the release, re-uptake
and recycling of neurotransmitters at synapses. High affinity tranport
proteins found in the plasma membrane of presynaptic nerve terminals and
glial cells are responsible for the removal from the extracellular space
of released-transmitters, thereby terminating their actions [1]. Plasma
membrane neurotransmitter transporters fall into two structurally and
mechanistically distinct families. The majority of the transporters
constitute an extensive family of homologous proteins that derive energy
from the co-transport of Na+ and Cl-, in order to transport neurotransmitter
molecules into the cell against their concentration gradient. The family 
has a common structure of 12 presumed transmembrane (TM) helices and 
includes carriers for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrenaline/
adrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, proline, glycine, choline, betaine and 
taurine. They are structurally distinct from the second more-restricted
family of plasma membrane transporters, which are responsible for excitatory
amino acid tranport. The latter couple glutamate and aspartate uptake to the
co-transport of Na+ and the counter-transport of K+, with no apparent
dependence on Cl- [2]. In addition, both of these transporter families
are distinct from the vesicular neurotransmitter transporters [3,4].

Sequence analysis of the Na+/Cl- neurotransmitter superfamily reveals that
it can be divided into four subfamilies, these being transporters for
monoamines, the amino acids proline and glycine, GABA, and a group of
orphan transporters [5].

GABA is the major inhibitory transmitter in the mammalian brain, and is
widely distributed throughout the nervous system. Molecular cloning
studies have resulted in the cloning of three Na+ and Cl- -coupled GABA
transporters (known as GAT-1, GAT-2, GAT-3) and a betaine/GABA transporter
(BGT-1). Each transporter shows varying affinities for GABA, different
substrate and blocker pharmacologies, and different tissue localisation [6].

GAT-2 protein expression has been studied with immunocytochemistry. High
levels of expression were detected in: the leptomeninges, choroid plexus,
and ependyma, with lower levels in the cortical parenchyma. GAT-2-positive
neuronal elements included perikarya, dendrites and axon terminals. Non-
neuronal elements expressing GAT-2 included cells forming the pia and
arachnoid mater, astrocytic processes, ependymal cells and epithelial cells
of the choroid plexuses. This widespread cellular expression of GAT-2 
suggests that it may have several functional roles in the overall regulation
of GABA levels in the brain [7].

GAT2TRNSPORT is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
GAT-2 GABA neurotransmitter transporter. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the GAT-2 GABA transporter but distinguish it
from others - motif 1 resides within the large putative extracellular loop
located between TM domains 3 and 4; and motifs 2-4 lie within the putative
cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the 
starting set.
