GLUTPROXDASE
Glutathione peroxidase (GSHPx), an enzyme whose principal function is to
protect against damage from endogenously-formed hydroxyperoxides, catalyses
the reduction of hydroxyperoxides by glutathione [1,2]:

2 Glutathione + H(2)O(2) = oxidised Glutathione + 2H(2)O

In higher vertebrates, several forms of GSHPx are known, including: a
ubiquitous cytosolic form (GSHPx-1); a gastrointestinal cytosolic form
(GSHPx-GI); a plasma secreted form (GSHPx-P); and an epididymal secretory
form (GSHPx-EP). 

In filarial nematode parasites, the major soluble cuticular protein (gp29)
is a secreted GSHPx, which may provide a mechanism of resistance to the 
immune reaction of the mammalian host by neutralising the products of the
oxidative burst of leukocytes [3].

The E.coli protein btuE, a periplasmic protein involved in vitamin B12
transport, is evolutionarily related to GSHPxs, although the significance
of this relationship is unclear.

The structure of bovine seleno-glutathione peroxidase has been determined
[4]. The protein belongs to the alpha-beta class, with a 3-layer(aba)
sandwich architecture. 

GLUTPROXDASE is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
glutathione peroxidase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 19 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the C-terminal end of
helix 2, strand 3 and the N-terminus of helix 3, and includes the region
encoded by PROSITE pattern GLUTATHIONE_PEROXID_1 (PS00460), which contains
the catalytic cysteine; motif 2 encompasses strand 4 and the N-terminus of
the following loop, and includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern 
GLUTATHIONE_PEROXID_2 (PS00763); and motif 3 spans strand 6 and half of 
the preceding loop. Three iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 66 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are
fragments or homologues that fail to match one of the motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 63 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
