BORPETOXINB
A large group of bacterial exotoxins are referred to as "A/B toxins", 
essentially because they are formed from two subunits [1]. The "A" subunit
possesses enzyme activity, and is transferred to the host cell following
a conformational change in the membrane-bound transport "B" subunit [1].

Bordetella pertussis is the causative agent of whooping cough, and is a 
Gram-negative aerobic coccus. Its major virulence factor is the pertussis 
toxin, an A/B exotoxin that mediates both colonisation and toxaemic stages
of the the disease [2-4]. Recombinant, inactive forms of the 5 subunits
that make up the toxin have proven to be good vaccines.

The S2 and S3 subunits of the toxin form part of the "B" moiety. They are
responsible for binding the whole toxin to host cells prior to invasion,
and are classed as adhesins [3]. S2 attaches to a host receptor called 
lactosylceramide. It has also been speculated that the S3 unit may 
preferentially bind phagocytes [3].

The crystal structure of pertussis toxin has been determined to 2.9A 
resolution [4]. The catalytic A-subunit (S1) shares structural similarity
with other ADP-ribosylating bacterial toxins, although differences in the
C-terminal portion explain its unique activation mechanism [4]. Despite its
heterogeneous subunit composition, the structure of the cell-binding
B-oligomer (S2, S3, two copies of S4, and S5) resembles the symmetrical
B-pentamers of the cholera and Shiga toxin families, but it interacts
differently with the A-subunit and there is virtually no sequence 
similarity between B-subunits of the different toxins [4]. Two peripheral
domains that are unique to the pertussis toxin B-oligomer share structural
similarity with a calcium-dependent eukaryotic lectin, and reveal possible
receptor-binding sites [4]. 

BORPETOXINB is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
Bordetella pertussis toxin B subunits. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length (~200 amino acids) - motif 1
includes alpha-helix1; motif 2 spans beta-strands 2 and 3 and helix 4; 
motif 3 includes strands 5 and 6; motif 4 spans strand 8 and the N-terminal
half of strand 9; motif 5 spans the C-terminus strand 9 and the N-terminal
portion of helix 6; and motif 6 includes the C-terminal half of strand 10.
A single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no
further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
