LEUKAEMIAIF
Leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is a secreted protein that has the
capacity to induce terminal differentiation in leukaemic cells. Its
activities include induction of hematopoietic differentiation in normal
and myeloid leukaemia cells, induction of neuronal cell differentiation,
and stimulation of acute-phase protein synthesis in hepatocytes. LIF
belongs to a family of proteins that includes oncostatin M (OSM) and
ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNF).

The structure of murine LIF has been determined to 2.0A resolution
using X-ray crystallography [1]. The protein core comprises 4 alpha-
helices arranged in the up-up-down-down orientation typical of other
4-helix bundle cytokines. Sequence alignments of the related molecules,
OSM and CNF, when mapped to the LIF structure, indicate regions of
conserved surface character [1]. Analysis of the biological function
and receptor specificity of a series of human-mouse LIF chimeras
implicate two regions of receptor interaction within the fourth helix
and the preceding loop. 

The solution structure of a murine-human chimera of LIF has been 
determined using multidimensional heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy [2]. The 
overall topology resembles that of the crystal structure of murine LIF: 
some small differences between the structures are evident in the N-terminal
region; the main difference occurs at the C-terminal end of the CD
loop. This loop is close to a receptor-binding site on LIF that makes
a major contribution to high affinity binding to the LIF receptor 
alpha-chain, and hence these differences may have implications for
derived structural models of LIF receptor interactions [2].

LEUKAEMIAIF is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
leukaemia inhibitory factor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 encodes the C-terminus of the 
signal peptide; motif 2 spans helix 1; motif 3 includes the beta-turn 
following helix 1; motif 4 spans helix 2 and the following beta-turn; 
motifs 5 and 6 span helix 3; motif 7 encodes helix 4; motif 8 lies N-
terminal to the C-terminal helix; and motif 9 spans this helix. A single
iteration on SPTR41_24f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
