SULFNYLUR2
The sulphonylurea receptor (SUR) is a member of the ATP-binding cassette
superfamily that associates with certain K+ channel inward rectifier
subunits to form ATP-sensitive K+ channels (KATP channels) [1,2].  These are
a family of K+ channels that are inhibited by intracellular ATP, which can
couple metabolic state to cell excitability. Their presence on pancreatic
islet beta cells allows the cells to function as metabolic sensors,
regulating insulin release in relation to glucose metabolism. Furthermore,
SUR is the site of action for the sulphonylurea oral hypoglycaemic agents 
that are used widely for the treatment of non-insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus. When these agents bind to the sulphonlyurea receptor, they reduce
KATP channel activity, stimulating insulin release.

As mentioned, SUR is a member of the ATP-binding cassette superfamily
(traffic adenosine triphsophatase superfamily), other members including the
P-glycoprotein multi-drug resistance (MDR) proteins and the cystic
fibrosis transconductance regulators (CFTRs). This raises the possibility
that SUR may transport some endogenous substance, as yet unidentified.
Two closely related genes have been found to encode the sulphonylurea
receptors, SUR1 and SUR2, there being three splice variants of the second
form [3]. They are thought to contain 13-17 transmembrane (TM) domains,
with two potential nucleotide binding folds, and a large number of possible
protein kinase A, or C phosphorylation sites. 

Comparison of the properties of cloned and wild-type KATP channels suggests
that splice variants of SUR2 (termed SUR2A and SUR2B) may form the cardiac
and smooth muscle KATP channel isoforms, when combined with the inward
rectifier subunit Kir 6.2.

SULFNYLUR2 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 2
sulphonylurea receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the N-terminal half
of the alignment, focusing on those regions that distinguish type 2 
sulphonylurea receptors from type 1 - motif 1 spans ~1/3 of the N-terminal
hydrophilic domain; motif 2 lies within the third putative extracellular
domain; motif 3 encodes the fifth extracellular domain; and motif 4 lies
within the first putative nucleotide binding fold. Two iterations on OWL31.1
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 8 sequences.
