MELATONIN1AR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Melatonin is secreted by the pineal gland during darkness [6]. It regulates
a variety of neuroendocrine functions and is thought to play an essential
role in circadian rhythms [6]. Drugs that modify the action of melatonin,
and hence influence circadian cycles, are of clinical interest (for example,
in the treatment of jet-lag) [6]. Melatonin receptors are found in the 
retina, in the pars tuberalis of the pituitary, and in discrete areas of 
the brain. The receptor inhibits adenylyl cyclase via a pertussis-toxin-
sensitive G protein, probably of the Gi/Go class [6]. 

Three sub-types have been cloned, designated Mel1a, Mel1b and Mel1c,
together with a closely related orphan receptor, termed Mel1x. The Mel1a
receptor appears to mediate the circadian and reproductive effects of the
hormone [7]. In situ hybridisation indicates that Mel1a receptor messenger
RNA is expressed in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei and hypophyseal
pars tuberalis, presumed sites of the circadian and some of reproductive 
actions of melatonin, respectively [7].

MELATONIN1AR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
melatonin 1A receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the melatonin 1A receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the melatonin receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 span the N-terminus,
leading into TM domain 1; motif 3 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 
4 spans part of the third external loop; and motifs 5 and 6 reside at the
C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified. Three 
partial matches were also found, melatonin 1C receptors that match motifs
2 and 6.
