TUBERIN
Tuberous sclerosis (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by a 
mutation in either the TSC1 or TSC2 tumour suppressor genes. The disease is
characterised by hamartomas in one or more organs (including brain, skin,
heart and kidney) giving rise to a broad phenotypic spectrum (including 
seizures, mental retardation, renal dysfunction and dermatological 
abnormalities [1]. TSC2 encodes tuberin, a putative GTPase activating
protein for rap1 and rab5. The TSC1 gene was recently identified and codes
for hamartin, a novel protein with no significant similarity to tuberin or
any other known vertebrate protein [1]. Hamartin and tuberin have been shown
to associate physically in vivo, their interaction being mediated by
predicted coiled-coil domains [1]. It is thought that hamartin and tuberin
function in the same complex, rather than in separate pathways [1].
Moreover, because oligomerisation of the hamartin C-terminal coiled coil
domain is inhibited by the presence of tuberin, it is possible that tuberin
acts as a chaperone, preventing hamartin self-aggregation. 

Tuberin, is a widely expressed 1784-amino-acid protein [2]. Expression of 
the wild-type gene in TSC2 mutant tumour cells inhibits proliferation and
tumorigenicity. This "suppressor" activity is encoded by a functional
domain in the C-terminus that shares similarity with the GTPase activating
protein Rap1GAP [2]. Using a yeast two-hybrid assay, the cytosolic factor,
rabaptin-5, was found to associate with a distinct domain lying adjacent
to the TSC2 GAP similarity region [2]. Rabaptin-5 also binds the active form
of GTPase Rab5. It is thought that tuberin may function as a Rab5GAP in vivo 
to negatively regulate Rab5-GTP activity in endocytosis [3]. 

TUBERIN is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tuberins.
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the
motifs were drawn largely from hydrophobic segments spanning virtually the
full alignment length. Two iterations on SPTR39_14f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 3 sequences was identified.
Two partial matches were also found, Q9VW83 and  Q9U9B0, both of which are
Drosophila gigas proteins (which belong to the GTPase activating protein
rap1GAP family) that match motifs 3 and 10.
