PGNDSYNTHASE
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Glutathione-independent prostaglandin D (PGD2) synthase (EC 5.3.99.2) is the
main factor involved in synthesis of PGD2 in the brain, accounting for over
90% of activity in the rat; it is responsible for catalysing the conversion
of PGH2 into PGD2 in the presence of various thiol compounds [5,6]. PGD2 is
a major prostaglandin in mammalian brains, functioning in the central 
nervous system as both a neuromodulator and a trophic factor. The enzymic
activity of PGD synthase makes it unique among the lipocalins. It is 
localised in the choroid plexus, meninges and oligodendrocytes, but is also 
a major component of cerebrospinal fiuid. Immunocytochemistry indicates that
the protein is associated with the rough endoplasmic reticulum and the outer
nuclear membranes of rat oligodendrocytes, and seems to be a peripheral 
membrane protein easily dissociated by detergents.

A near homologue of PGD2 synthase has been identified in cane-toad (Bufo 
marinus) choroid plexus, where it is the most abundant protein secreted into
the cerebrospinal fluid [7]. It is also found in other areas of the brain,
albeit at much lower levels, and is expressed throughout amphibian 
metamorphosis. The choroid plexus helps form the barrier between blood and 
cerebrospinal fluid, and it has been suggested that this lipocalin may help 
transport lipophilic molecules across the blood/brain barrier.

The PGD2 syhnthase homologue cpl-1 is expressed in the early neural plate of
Xenopus laevis embryos and the adult choroid plexus [8]. In AtT20 cells, 
cpl-1 is secreted via the constitutive secretory pathway. The protein was 
found to bind retinal at nanomolar concentration, retinoic acid at
micromolar concentration, but shows no retinol binding. It also binds 
thyroxine. Cpl1 is thought to bind retinaldehyde during its transport
through secretory pathway compartments. It has been suggested that the
protein is an integral member of the retinoid signalling pathway and plays
a key role in early embryo pattern formation.

PGNDSYNTHASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
prostagladin D synthases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 covers the N-terminal
310 helix and strand A, which includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
LIPOCALIN (PS00213) and corresponds to motif 1 of the LIPOCALIN fingerprint;
motif 2 encodes the end of the large loop L1 and the second beta-strand; 
motif 3 spans strands 2 and 3; motif 4, which spans the C-terminus of
strand 6 and strand 7, corresponds to the second LIPOCALIN motif; motif 5,
which spans strand 8 and the N-terminus of the main C-terminal alpha helix, is similar 
corresponds to the third LIPOCALIN motif; and motif 6 spans the end of the
C-terminal helix and also includes the short beta-strand 9. Two iterations
on SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 12 sequences was identified.
