TNFACTORR21
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 21, also termed death receptor 6 (DR6), is expressed 
ubiquitously, with high expression in lymphoid organs, heart, brain and 
pancreas. The receptor plays an important regulatory role in the generation
of adaptive immunity and may be involved in tumour cell survival and immune
evasion [7]. It has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's
disease, as activation of the receptor by beta-amyloid precursor protein
triggers neuronal death via a caspase-dependent pathway [8].

TNFACTORR21 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 21. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in 
the C-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise TNF receptor 21 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motif 1 spans part of the extracellular N-terminal region and 
part of the transmembrane domain, and motifs 2-4 lie in the intracellular
C-terminal region. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11 sequences was
identified. 
