NEUROMEDINUR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Neuromedin U is a neuropeptide, first isolated from porcine spinal cord and
expressed widely in the gastrointestinal, genitourinary and central nervous
systems [6,7]. Neuromedin U has potent contractile activity on smooth muscle
and this activity is believed to reside within the C-terminal portion of 
the peptide, which is highly conserved between species [6]. Other roles 
for the peptide include: regulation of blood flow and ion transport in 
the intestine, regulation of adrenocortical function and increased blood
pressure [6,7]. The roles of neuromedin U in the central nervous system
are poorly understood, but may include: regulation of food intake,
neuroendocrine control, modulation of dopamine actions and involvement in
neuropsychiatric disorders [6]. Two G protein-coupled receptor subtypes,
with differing expression patterns, have been identified and shown to bind
neuromedin U [6,7].

NEUROMEDINUR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
neuromedin U receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within the loop regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the neuromedin U receptors but distinguish them from the rest
of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 spans the first cytoplasmic
loop, leading into TM domain 2; motif 2 encodes the C-terminal portion of 
TM domain 2 and the first external loop; motif 3 spans part of TM domain 4,
leading into the second external loop; motif 4 lies in the second external
loop; motif 5 resides at the C-terminus of TM domain 6, leading into the
third external loop; and motif 6 encodes the C-terminal portion of the third
external loop and part of TM domain 7. Two iterations on SPTR39.22_17.3f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, Q9VFN4, a
Drosophila GPCR that matches motifs 1 and 2.
