HISTAMINEH3R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
paracrine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 
   
Histamine is distributed within mast cells in all peripheral tissues and 
is a well-characterised mediator of inflammation and allergy [6]. It also
regulates release of gastric acid from parietal cells in the gastric mucosa.
H3 receptors function as presynaptic autoreceptors on histamine-containing
neurones. They are expressed abundantly in the central nervous system, with
highest levels found in the thalamus, caudate nucleus and cortex. High
levels of expression are also found in the hypothalamus, hippocampus and
olfactory tubercle. In the periphery, low levels of H3 have been detected in
the human small intestine, testis and prostate but not in a number of other
tissues tested, including the heart, lung and spleen [7]. Binding of 
histamine to H3 receptors results in inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP
accumulation, suggesting coupling to a G protein of the Gi class [7].

HISTAMINEH3R is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
histamine H3 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within the N-terminus and loop regions, focusing on those regions of the 
alignment that characterise the histamine H3 receptors but distinguish them 
from the rest of the histamine receptor family - motif 1 is located in the
N-terminus; motif 2 spans part of the N-terminus leading into TM domain 1;
motifs 3 and 4 span the second external loop; motifs 5 and 6 span the
N-terminal region of the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 7 encodes the
C-terminus of the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 8 resides at the
C-terminus of TM domain 6, leading into the third external loop. Two 
iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified.
