ADHRELATED
Drosophila alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), an NAD(H)-dependent oxidoreductase,
is a member of the short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR) family. The
enzyme is homodimeric and catalyses the dehydrogenation of alcohols to their
respective ketones or aldehydes, both for metabolic assimilation and
detoxification purposes. 

Insect ADH is very different from yeast and mammalian ADHs. The enzyme from 
Drosophila lebanonensis has been characterised by protein analysis and was
found to have a 254-residue protein chain with an acetyl-blocked N-terminal
Met [1]. Comparisons with the enzyme from other species reveals that they
have diverged considerably. The structural variation within Drosophila is 
about as large as that for mammalian zinc-containing alcohol dehydrogenase.

The crystal structure of the apo form of Drosophila ADH has been solved to
1.9A resolution [2]. Each ADH subunit is revealed to have a mono-domain 
alpha/beta structure, with a characteristic NAD(H)-binding Rossmann fold.
The polypeptide chain folds into a central 8-stranded beta-sheet, flanked 
on each side by 3 alpha-helices. The dimers have local 2-fold symmetry and
essentially associate via a 4-helix bundle. Three structural features 
characterise the active site architecture: (i) a deep cavity, covered by a
flexible 33-residue loop and an 11-residue C-terminal tail of the 
neighbouring subunit, whose hydrophobic surface is likely to increase the
specificity of the enzyme for secondary aliphatic alcohols; (ii) the 
Ser-Tyr-Lys residues of the catalytic triad are known to be involved in
enzymatic catalysis; and (iii) 3 well-ordered water molecules in hydrogen 
bonding distance of side-chains of the catalytic triad may be significant
for the proton release steps in the catalysis. 

A number of proteins within the SDR family share a strong phylogenetic
relationship with insect ADH. Amongst these are Drosophila ADH-related
protein (duplicate of Adh or Adh-dup) [3]; Drosophila fat body protein
[4]; and development-specific 25kDa protein from Sarcophaga peregrina [5].

The genomic Adh region in Drosophila ambigua has been characterised and
compared with that of Drosophila mauritiana and Drosophila pseudoobscura  
and the presence of two genes, Adh and Adh-dup, has been confirmed [6].
Inter- and intraspecific comparisons support the notion that both genes may 
have diverged from an ancient precursor [6]. They appear to be evolving 
independently, and show a species-specific pattern. Adh in the obscura
group lacks amino acids three and four when compared to species of the 
melanogaster group, and has accumulated most of its amino acid replacements
in the third exon [6]. Neither characteristic is observed when other
species are compared, suggesting that these may be particular features of
the evolution of the obscura group [6]. Adh-dup is highly conserved,
although variability in the length of the third exon and the nucleotide
substitution rate, which is much higher than in Adh, are notable. 

ADHRELATED is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
alcohol dehydrogenase related (Adh-dup) proteins. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from short conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length,
focusing on those sections that characterise the ADH-related proteins but
distinguish them from the rest of the ADH family - motif 1 spans the
C-terminus of helix 1 and strand 2; motif 2 spans the C-terminal portion of
helix 2 and strand 3; motif 3 encodes helix 3; motif 4 spans helix 9 and 
strand 6; motif 5 includes helices 10 and 11; and motif 6 includes strand 
10. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified. A single 
partial match was also found, an ADH from Sarcophaga peregrina that matches
motifs 1 and 4.
