TNFACTORR16
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 16 (also known as nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR) and 
p75NTR)) acts as a low affinity receptor for neurotrophins. The receptor 
mediates a variety of contradictory cellular functions, including cell 
survival or apoptosis, promotion or inhibition of axonal growth, and
facilitation or attenuation of proliferation, depending on the cellular 
context [7]. The receptor may also play a role in inflammation, and has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of asthma [8].

TNFACTORR16 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 16. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in
the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise TNF receptor 16 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - all motifs lie in the extracellular N-terminal region. Two 
iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were
also found, B6MU31_BRAFL and B4E096_HUMAN, which are lancelet and human 
translated sequences that fail to match motif 4, and motifs 1 and 2, 
respectively.
