ACOABIOTINCC
Fatty acid synthesis involves a set of reactions, commencing with 
carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA [1]. This is an irreversible
reaction, catalysed by the acetyl-CoA carboxylase complex (EC 6.4.1.2); a
heterohexamer of biotin carboxyl carrier protein, biotin carboxylase [2] and
two non-identical carboxyl transferase subunits (alpha and beta) in a 2:2
association [1,3]. 

The reaction involves two steps: 

(1) Biotin carrier protein + ATP + HCO(3)(-) <=>
	    Carboxybiotin carrier protein + ADP + Phosphate

(2) Carboxybiotin carrier protein + Acetyl-CoA ->
	    Malonyl-CoA + Biotin carrier protein

In the first step, biotin carboxylase catalyses the carboxylation of the
carrier protein to form an intermediate. Next, the transcarboxylase complex
transfers the carboxyl group from the intermediate to acetyl-CoA forming
malonyl-CoA.

The crystal structure of selenomethionyl (Se-met) biotin carboxy carrier 
protein has been determined to 1.8A resolution [4]. The structure forms a
capped beta sandwich with quasi-dyad symmetry, each half of which contains
a characteristic hammerhead motif [4]. The biotinylated lysine is located at
a hairpin beta-turn that connects the symmetric halves of the molecule, and
its biotinyl group interacts with a non-symmetric protrusion from the core.
The hammerhead domain is regarded as the basic structural motif of biotinyl
and lipoyl domains of a superfamily of enzymes [4].

ACOABIOTINCC is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
acetyl-CoA biotin carboxyl carrier protein. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions within the C-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 encodes 
beta-strand 2; motif 2 spans strand 3 and the N-terminus of strand 4; and
motif 3 spans the C-terminus of strand 4 and beta-strand 5, and includes the
biotin-binding lysine (motifs 2 and 3 span the region encoded by PROSITE
pattern BIOTIN (PS00188)). Three iterations on OWL31.1 were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 21 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, S66566, a biotin 
carboxyl carrier fragment that matches motifs 2 and 3.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 18 sequences.
