NTKRECEPTOR1
Neurotrophins are a family of secreted proteins that regulate development, 
maintenance and function of vertebrate nervous systems. They act via two 
different classes of receptor: p75NTR (a member of the TNF receptor 
superfamily), and neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptors (NTRKs) - also 
known as tropomyosin-related kinases (Trks) [1].

NTRKs are multi-domain, transmembrane proteins - in addition to their
cytoplasmic kinase domains, members of the family possess a number of
extracellular leucine-rich repeat (LRR) and Ig-like C2-type regions. Ligand
binding induces them to dimerise, resulting in activation of their
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains. The activated receptors couple to a
variety of intracellular signalling cascades, including the Ras,
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI-3 kinase), mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase, and phospholipase C (PLC)-gamma pathways [2].

NTRK1 (also termed TrkA) is a high-affinity receptor for nerve growth 
factor (NGF). The receptor is expressed in the dorsal root ganglia,
trigeminal ganglia and sympathetic neurons of the peripheral nervous
system, and in basal forebrain cholinergic neurons [3]. It is also
expressed in peripheral sites, such as scalp skin [4]. Whereas p75NTR 
activation by NGF induces apoptosis, NTRK1 mediates the growth factor's 
cell survival-promoting effects [5].

NTKRECEPTOR1 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 1. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the central portion of the alignment, focusing on 
those sections that characterise NTRK1 but distinguish it from other members
of the NTRK family: motif 1 lies within the N-terminal extracellular region; 
and motifs 2 and 3 reside in the cytoplasmic portion of the receptor. Two
iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified.
