SOPEPROTEIN
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens, such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[1] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [1]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [1], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

Effector proteins secreted by the type III system do not possess a secretion 
signal, and are considered unique because of this [1]. Salmonella spp. 
secrete an effector protein called SopE that is responsible for stimulating 
the reorganisation of the host cell actin cytoskeleton, and ruffling of the 
cellular membrane [2]. It acts as a guanyl-nucleotide-exchange factor on Rho- 
GTPase proteins such as Cdc42 and Rac. As it is imperative for the bacterium 
to revert the cell back to its "normal" state as quickly as possible, 
another tyrosine phosphatase effector called SptP reverses the actions 
brought about by SopE [2,3]. 

Recently, it has been found that SopE and its protein homologue SopE2 can
activate different sets of Rho-GTPases in the host cell [3]. Far from being 
a redundant set of two similar type III effectors, they both act in unison 
to specifically activate different Rho-GTPase signalling cascades in the
host cell during infection [3].

SOPEPROTEIN is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
the Salmonella type III secretion SopE effector protein family. The 
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs 
were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~240
amino acids). A single iteration on SPTR39_17f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
