BETTRANSPORT
Neurotransmitter transport systems are integral to the release, re-uptake
and recycling of neurotransmitters at synapses. High affinity tranport
proteins found in the plasma membrane of presynaptic nerve terminals and
glial cells are responsible for the removal from the extracellular space
of released-transmitters, thereby terminating their actions [1]. Plasma
membrane neurotransmitter transporters fall into two structurally and
mechanistically distinct families. The majority of the transporters
constitute an extensive family of homologous proteins that derive energy
from the co-transport of Na+ and Cl-, in order to transport neurotransmitter
molecules into the cell against their concentration gradient. The family 
has a common structure of 12 presumed transmembrane helices and includes 
carriers for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrenaline/adrenaline, 
dopamine, serotonin, proline, glycine, choline, betaine and taurine. They
are structurally distinct from the second more-restricted family of plasma
membrane transporters, which are responsible for excitatory amino acid
tranport. The latter couple glutamate and aspartate uptake to the co-
transport of Na+ and the counter-transport of K+, with no apparent
dependence on Cl- [2]. In addition, both of these transporter families
are distinct from the vesicular neurotransmitter transporters [3,4].

Sequence analysis of the Na+/Cl- neurotransmitter superfamily reveals that
it can be divided into four subfamilies, these being transporters for
monoamines, the amino acids proline and glycine, GABA, and a group of
orphan transporters [5].

Cells regulate their volume and adapt to alterations in the tonicity of
their local environment by adjusting their solute content accordingly.
Resultant water movements rapidly establish osmotic balance. Solutes
utilised in this manner are referred to as osmolytes and include: glycero-
phosphorylcholine, betaine, myo-inositol, sorbitol and taurine [6].
Cell membrane transporters for betaine and taurine have been cloned, and by
sequence similarity they have been shown to belong to the Na+ and Cl-
-coupled neurotransmitter transporter superfamily. Functional studies of
the cloned betaine transporter (BGT-1) have revealed that it can also
transport GABA, and that its mode of transport is electrogenic, with uptake
of betaine depolarising the cell [7]. In humans, the gene maps to chromosome
12p13, and is found to be expressed in: the kidney, brain, liver, heart,
skeletal muscle and placenta.

BETTRANSPORT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
betaine transporter. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the N- and C-terminal regions of
the alignment, focusing on those sections that characterise the betaine
transporter but distinguish it from others - motif 1 lies at the start of
the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; and motifs 2-3 reside within the
putative cytoplasmic C-terminal tail. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.
