TAPASIN
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules present antigenic 
peptides to CD8 T cells. The majority of peptides found associated with 
class I molecules are derived from nuclear and cytosolic proteins, and they 
are generated largely by the proteasome complex. These peptides are 
transported from cytosol into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum  
(ER) by a peptide transporter, which is known as the transporter associated 
with antigen processing (TAP). TAP is a trimeric complex consisting of 
TAP1, TAP2 and tapasin (TAP-A). TAP1 and TAP2 are required for peptide 
transport. Tapasin, which actually serves as a docking site on the TAP 
complex specific for interaction with class I MHC molecules, is essential 
for peptide loading (up to four MHC class I-tapasin complexes have been
found to bind to each TAP molecule). However, since the exact mechanisms of
tapasin functions are still unknown, it has also been speculated that
tapasin may regulate the MHC class I release from the ER rather than 
directly loading peptides onto MHC class I molecules [1-4]. 

In studies of the interaction between MHC class I and TAP, it was found that 
TAP1, but not TAP2, is required for the association of TAP with class I 
molecules. Because tapasin is essential for the association of MHC class I 
to TAP, tapasin may directly interact with TAP1. Thus the predicted order of 
interaction between different molecules in the TAP complex is TAP2 to TAP1, 
TAP1 to tapasin, and tapasin to MHC class I molecules. Thus, by these linked 
events, the translocation and loading of peptides rapidly and efficiently
proceed in the same microenvironment [1,5].

Tapasin is a type I transmembrane (TM) glycoprotein with a double lysine
motif that is thought to be involved with mediating the retrieval of 
proteins back from the cis-Golgi, thus maintaining membrane proteins in the
ER [2]. It is encoded by an MHC-linked gene and is a member of the
immunoglobulin superfamily. Binding to TAP is mediated by the C-terminal
region, whereas its N-terminal 50 residues constitute the key element that
converts the MHC class I molecules and TAP weak interactions into a stable
complex [3,4].

Mouse tapasin shows 78% identity to the human tapasin, with identical signal 
peptide, N-glycosylation site, TM domain and double lysine motif at the
C-terminal end, indicative of similar functions for human and mouse tapasin.
An interesting feature of the sequence of mouse tapasin is the predicted
cytosolic domain, which shares less that 50% similarity with the human
proteins. In addition, mouse tapasin has 14 extra amino acid residues at 
the C-terminus, suggestive of species specificity of the tapasin function.
The cytosolic domain of tapasin may determine its interaction with MHC
class I or TAP1 [3].

TAPASIN is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
tapasins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motifs 6 and 7 lie within the IG-like C1-type
domain. Two iterations on SPTR39_17f were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified.
