TRAAKCHANNEL
Potassium (K+) channels play a key role in many cellular functions, in both
excitable and non-excitable tissues. Among the ion channels, they form the
largest family in terms of both structure and function. K+ channel subunits
contain a conserved pore-forming motif, the P-domain, which is considered to
be an essential element of the aqueous K+-selective pore. Shaker-type and
Kir K+ channel subunits both contain a single P-domain, and four such
subunits are thought to associate to form a multimer, together with 
associated auxillary (regulatory) subunits. Recently, a new class of K+ 
channel subunits was cloned, which is clearly distinct from the Shaker and
Kir families; the new class contains not one but two P-domains in each 
subunit, and evidence suggests a complete channel may be formed by the 
dimerisation of two such subunits.
                    
The first member of this family (TOK1) cloned from S.cerevisiae [1] was
predicted to have eight potential transmembrane (TM) helices. However,
subsequently-cloned two P-domain family members from Drosophila and
mammalian species are predicted to have only four TM segments. They are
usually referred to as TWIK-related channels (Tandem of P-domains in a 
Weakly Inward rectifying K+ channel) [2-6]. Functional characterisation of
these channels has revealed a diversity of properties in that they may show
inward or outward rectification, their activity may be modulated in 
different directions by protein phosphorylation, and their sensitivity to
changes in intracellular or extracellular pH varies. Despite these disparate
properties, they are all thought to share the same topology of four TM 
segments, including two P-domains. That TWIK-related K+ channels all produce
instantaneous and non-inactivating K+ currents, which do not display a
voltage-dependent activation threshold, suggests that they are background 
(leak) K+ channels involved in the generation and modulation of the resting
membrane potential in various cell types. Further studies have revealed that
they may be found in many species, including: plants, invertebrates and 
mammals.

TRAAK (TWIK-related arachidonic acid-stimulated K+ channel) is a member of
the 2P-domain K+ channel family, and is expressed mainly in the brain and
placenta [7]. It is strongly activated by unsaturated fatty acids, such as
oleate and linoleate. An alternative way of activating TRAAK channels is the
application of stretch to the cell membrane, for example, by means of cell
swelling, shear stress or negative pressure [8].

TRAAKCHANNEL is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
TRAAK K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full length of the alignment - motif 1 lies in the loop between TM
domains 1 and 2; motifs 2 and 3 span the loop between TM2 and TM3; and 
motifs 4-6 reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR40_18f was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.
