INTRLKN1R12F
Interleukin-1 alpha and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 alpha and IL-1 beta) are 
cytokines that participate in the regulation of immune responses,
inflammatory reactions, and hematopoiesis [1]. Two types of IL-1 receptor, 
each with three extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains, limited
sequence similarity (28%) and different pharmacological characteristics
have been cloned from mouse and human cell lines: these have been termed 
type I and type II receptors [2]. The receptors both exist in transmembrane
(TM) and soluble forms: the soluble IL-1 receptor is thought to be post-
translationally derived from cleavage of the extracellular portion of the
membrane receptors [2].

Both IL-1 receptors appear to be well conserved in evolution, and map to the
same chromosomal location [3]. The receptors can both bind all three forms 
of IL-1 (IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta and IL-1RA) [3].

The vaccinia virus genes B15R and B18R each encode proteins with N-terminal 
hydrophobic sequences, possible sites for attachment of N-linked 
carbohydrate and a short C-terminal hydrophobic domain [4]. These properties
are consistent with the mature proteins being either virion, cell surface
or secretory glycoproteins. Protein sequence comparisons reveal that
the gene products are related to each other (20% identity) and to the Ig
superfamily [4]. The highest degree of similarity is to the human and murine
interleukin-1 receptors, although both proteins are related to a wide range
of Ig superfamily members, including the interleukin-6 receptor [4]. A novel
method for virus immune evasion has been proposed in which the product of 
one or both of these proteins may bind interleukin-1 and/or interleukin-6,
preventing these cytokines reaching their natural receptors [4]. A similar
gene product from cowpox virus has also been shown to specifically bind
murine IL-1 beta [5]. 

The crystal structure of the soluble extracellular part of type-I IL1R
complexed with IL1RA has been determined to 2.7A resolution [6]. The
receptor structure is characterised by three Ig-like domains, of which
domains 1 and 2 are tightly linked, while domain 3 is completely separate
and connected by a flexible linker [6].  

INTRLKN1R12F is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
interleukin-1 receptor type I and type II family. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from short conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment,
focusing on those sections that characterise the interleukin-1 receptor
type I and type II precursors but distinguish them from other members of
interleukin-1 receptor family - motifs 1-3 span Ig-like C2-type domain 1;
motifs 4 and 5 span Ig-like C2-type domain 2; and motifs 6 and 7 reside
within Ig-like C2-type domain 3. Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 18 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are 
interleukin-1 receptor accessory and/or related proteins that fail to make
significant matches with one or more motifs.
