VRL2RECEPTOR
Transient receptor potential (Trp) and related proteins are thought to be
Ca2+ ion channel subunits that mediate capacitative Ca2+ entry in response 
to a range of external and internal cell stimuli. Such Ca2+ entry is thought 
to be an essential component of cellular responses to many hormones and
growth factors, and acts to replenish intracellular Ca2+ stores that have
been emptied through the action of inositol triphosphate (IP3) and other 
agents. In non-excitable cells (i.e., those that lack voltage-gated Ca2+
channels, such as hepatocytes), this mode of Ca2+ entry is thought to be an
important step in generating the oscillations of intracellular Ca2+
concentration that characterise their response to stimulatory agents [1].

Studies on the visual transduction system in Drosophila led to the molecular
cloning of Trp and of a related protein, Trp-like, which show similarity to
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the regions known as S3-S6, including the S5-
S6 linker, which forms the ion-selective channel pore [2]. This provided 
evidence that Trp and/or related proteins might form mammalian capacitative 
Ca2+ entry channels. The sequences of these proteins have varying lengths 
(usually 800-1000 amino acid residues), and hydropathy plots suggest they 
have 6 or more transmembrane (TM) domains, flanked by cytosolic N- and C-
termini. In addition, most contain N-terminal ankyrin repeats [2,3].

Following the cloning of the vanilloid receptor (VR1), at least 4 other
related proteins have been identified. Together, these form a distinct
subgroup of the TRP family. Members of the vanilloid receptor family (TRPV)
are activated by a diverse range of stimuli, including heat, protons,
lipids, phorbols, phosphorylation, changes in extracellular osmolarity
and/or pressure, and depletion of intracellular calcium stores [3]. To date,
2 vanilloid receptor-like proteins (VRL-1 and VRL-2) and at least 2 
epithelial calcium channels (ECAC) have been reported.

VRL-2 (also known as VR-OAC, OTRPC4, TRP12) is expressed at high levels in 
kidney, liver, heart and central nervous system. It is an osmotically 
regulated channel, which suggests that it could be activated by physical 
stimuli, such as cell swelling. However, VRL-2 is not gated directly by 
membrane stretch [4]; thus, as with swelling-activated anion channels, a 
cytoplasmic signal transduction pathway is likely to be involved, with 
cross-talk with other activation pathways. It is possible that they may play
a role in a range of conditions that result from deficits in osmoregulation. 
Targeting VRL-2 might therefore be of benefit in conditions such as impaired 
hearing or kidney dysfunction [5].

VRL2RECEPTOR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
vanilloid receptor-like 2 protein (VRL-2) family. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length - motifs 1-4 lie 
in the N-terminus; motif 5 encodes the third TM domain; and motif 6 resides 
in the loop region between the fifth TM domain and the pore-domain. Two 
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point 
a true set comprising 11 sequences was identified.
