TNFACTORR18
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 18 is also known as glucocorticoid-induced TNFR family-related
gene (GITR) and activation-inducible TNFR family member (AITR). Expression
of the receptor by T-lymphocytes has been shown to have an anti-apoptotic 
effect, indicating that it may play a role in the regulation of T-cell 
receptor-mediated cell death [7].

TNFACTORR18 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 18. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in 
the N-terminal two thirds of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise TNF receptor 18 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - all motifs lie within the extracellular N-terminal region. Two
iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 9 sequences was identified. Three partial matches were
also found, all of which fail to match motif 3: B1ASL4_MOUSE and
B1AME1_HUMAN are TNF receptor 18 splice variants from mouse and human,
and Q5M835_RAT is a translated mouse cDNA sequence.
