GPR40FAMILY
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of which
transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the receptors
are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural framework
comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

A cluster of four intronless GPCR genes, sharing significant sequence
similarity with one another, have been identified on human chromosome
19q13.1, downstream from the CD22 gene [6]. The receptors have been named
GPR40, GPR41, GPR42 and GPR43. The GPR42 protein sequence shares more
than 98% amino acid identity with GPR41 and is located on a possible
polymorphic insert [6].

GPR40FAMILY is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
GPR40-related receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within loop and TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the GPR40-related receptors but distinguish them from the rest
of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies in the first external loop;
motif 2 encodes the C-terminus of TM domain 3, leading into the second
cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 resides at the C-terminus of TM domain 5; motif 4
is located at the N-terminus of TM domain 6; and motif 5 spans the
C-terminal portion of TM domain 6. A single iteration on SPTR40_22f was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified
beyond the starting set.
