ETOFAMILY
Transcriptional activation and repression is required for control of
cell proliferation and differentiation during embryonic development and
homeostasis in the adult organism. Perturbations of these processes can
lead to the development of cancer [1]. The Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) gene
product is able to form complexes with corepressors and deacetylases,
such as nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR), which repress transcription
when recruited by transcription factors [2].

The ETO gene derives its name from its association with many cases of
acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML), in which a reciprocal translocation,
t(8;21), brings together a large portion of the ETO gene from chromosome
eight and part of the AML1 gene from chromosome 21. The human ETO gene
family currently comprises three major subfamilies: ETO/myeloid
transforming gene on chromosome 8 (MTG8); myeloid transforming gene related
protein-1 (MTGR1) and myeloid transforming gene on chromosome 16 (MTG16).

ETO proteins are composed of four evolutionarily conserved domains termed
nervy homology regions (NHR) 1-4. NHR1 is thought to stabilise the formation
of high molecular weight complexes, but is not directly responsible for
repressor activity. NHR2 and its flanking sequence comprise the core
repressor domain, which mediates 50% of the wild type repressor activity.
Furthermore, there is evidence that the amphipathic helical structure of
NHR2 promotes the formation of ETO/AML1 homodimers [1]. NHR3 and NHR4 have
been shown to act in concert to bind N-CoR. NHR4 contains two zinc finger
motifs, which are thought to play a role in protein interactions rather
than DNA binding [2].

ETOFAMILY is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motifs 1 and 2 lie within NHR1; motif 3
resides between NHR3 and NHR4; and motif 4 is located within NHR4. Two
iterations on SPTR40_22f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 14 sequences was identified. A single partial match
was also found, Q96L00, a human MTGR1 protein matching motifs 1 and 2.
