THIKCHANNEL
Potassium (K+) channels play a key role in many cellular functions, in both
excitable and non-excitable tissues. Among the ion channels, they form the
largest family in terms of both structure and function. K+ channel subunits
contain a conserved pore-forming motif, the P-domain, which is considered to
be an essential element of the aqueous K+-selective pore. Shaker-type and
Kir K+ channel subunits both contain a single P-domain, and four such
subunits are thought to associate to form a multimer, together with 
associated auxillary (regulatory) subunits. Recently, a new class of K+ 
channel subunits was cloned, which is clearly distinct from the Shaker and
Kir families; the new class contains not one but two P-domains in each 
subunit, and evidence suggests a complete channel may be formed by the 
dimerisation of two such subunits.

The first member of this family (TOK1) cloned from S.cerevisiae [1] was
predicted to have eight potential transmembrane (TM) helices. However,
subsequently-cloned two P-domain family members from Drosophila and
mammalian species are predicted to have only four TM segments. They are
usually referred to as TWIK-related channels (Tandem of P-domains in a 
Weakly Inward rectifying K+ channel) [2-6]. Functional characterisation of
these channels has revealed a diversity of properties in that they may show 
inward or outward rectification, their activity may be modulated in 
different directions by protein phosphorylation, and their sensitivity to
changes in intracellular or extracellular pH varies. Despite these disparate
properties, they are all thought to share the same topology of four TM 
segments, including two P-domains. That TWIK-related K+ channels all produce
instantaneous and non-inactivating K+ currents, which do not display a
voltage-dependent activation threshold, suggests that they are background 
(leak) K+ channels involved in the generation and modulation of the resting
membrane potential in various cell types. Further studies have revealed that
they may be found in many species, including: plants, invertebrates and 
mammals.

The THIK (Tandem pore-domain Halothane Inhibited K+ channel) family
contains two members: THIK-1 and THIK-2. Both proteins were first isolated
from rat and have subsequently been found in human. THIK-1 is expressed
ubiquitously and is activated by arachidonic acid and inhibited by the
volatile anaesthetic halothane. The second member, THIK-2, shares 58% amino
acid identity with THIK-1, but is not functionally expressed. THIK-2 is 
strongly expressed in several tissues, and is particularly abundant in the
brain [7].

THIKCHANNEL is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
THIK K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise
THIK channel proteins but distinguish them from related two P-domain K+
channel sequences - motif 1 is situated in the first putative TM domain; 
motifs 2 and 3 are located in the N-terminus of the first P-domain; motif 4
lies in the C-terminus of the first P-domain; motif 5 spans the N-terminus
of the second P-domain; motif 6 lies in the fourth TM domain; and motif 7
resides in the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was 
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.
