FSHRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The gonadotrophins (luteinising hormone, choriogonadotrophin, follicle-
stimulating hormone) and thyroid-stimulating hormone are heterotrimeric
glycoproteins composed of a common alpha-subunit and distinct beta-subunits
[6]. The carbohydrate moiety of the glycoproteins has an essential role in
receptor recognition. The receptors share close sequence similarity, and
are characterised by large extracellular domains believed to be involved
in hormone binding via leucine-rich repeats (LRR) [7]. Modelling of this
portion of the receptors suggests that they contain three-dimensional
structures similar to that of porcine ribonuclease inhibitor [7].

FSH is released from the anterior pituitary under the influence of
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone and oestrogens, and from the placenta during
pregnancy [6]. In females, it acts on the ovaries, promoting development
of follicles and is the principal hormone regulating secretion of
oestrogens [6]. In males, it is responsible for the integrity of the
seminiferous tubules and acts on Sertoli cells to support gametogenesis [6].
FSH is used clinically to treat infertility in females and for some types
of spermatogenesis in males [6]. The receptor is found in ovary and testis,
its predominant effector pathway being via activation of adenylyl cyclase
through Gs [6].

FSHRECEPTOR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
follicle stimulating hormone receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those 
sections that characterise the FSH receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the glycoprotein hormone receptor family - motifs 1-9 reside within
the N-terminal half of the alignment, prior to the TM domains; and motif 10
lies at the C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 10 sequences was identfied.
Two partial matches were also found, Q28574 and Q28573, both of which are
fragments.
