TCRTETOQM
Tetracycline binds to the prokaryotic ribosomal 30S subunit and inhibits 
binding of aminoacyl-tRNAs. The tetracycline resistance (Tcr) proteins 
tetM/tetO from bacteria such as Campylobacter jejuni, Enterococcus faecalis,
Streptococcus mutans and Ureaplasma urealyticum, abolish the inhibitory
effect of tetracycline on protein synthesis [1-4]. Comparison of the amino
acid sequences of TetO and TetM reveals 76% similarity, and hydropathy
analyses show almost identical profiles, suggesting that TcR determinants
in Gram-positive bacteria and in C.jejuni may have a common ancestry [1]. 

The ribosome protection type of tetracycline resistance has been found in a 
variety of bacterial species. It first appeared that this type of resistance
emerged recently in evolution and spread among different species of bacteria
by horizontal transmission. 

The Tcr gene product from Bacteroides, a genus of Gram-negative, obligately 
anaerobic bacteria that is phylogenetically distant from the diverse species
in which tetM and tetO have been found, has been shown to be 40% identical 
to TetM and TetO. The Bacteroides Tcr gene thus defines a new class of
ribosome protection resistance genes, designated tetQ [4]. Like tetM and 
tetO, tetQ appears to have spread by horizontal transmission, but only
within the Bacteroides group [4]. Many human colonic Bacteroides strains
carry large (greater than 70kbp) self-transmissible chromosomal Tcr
elements [4]. 

The TetM/TetO group of Tcr proteins shows significant similarity to 
translational elongation factors of prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 

TCRTETOQM is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
tetracycline resistance TetO/TetQ/TetM family. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the central portion of the alignment. Three
iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 23 sequences was identified. Several partial matches 
were also found: TETM_STRLI and S18572 are tetracycline resistance proteins
from Streptomyces that match 4 motifs; the rest are elongation factors and
elongation factor-like proteins that match motifs 1-3.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 23 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
