NACHANNEL5
Voltage-dependent sodium channels are transmembrane (TM) proteins
responsible for the depolarising phase of the action potential in most
electrically excitable cells [1]. They may exist in 3 states [3]: the
resting state, where the channel is closed; the activated state, where the
channel is open; and the inactivated state, where the channel is closed
and refractory to opening. Several different structurally and functionally
distinct isoforms are found in mammals, coded for by a multigene family
[4], these being responsible for the different types of sodium ion currents
found in excitable tissues.
                
The structure of sodium channels is based on 4 internal repeats of a 6-helix
bundle [2] (in which 5 of the membrane-spanning segments are hydrophobic and
the other is positively charged), forming a 24-helical bundle. The charged
segments are believed to be localised within clusters formed by their 5
hydrophobic neighbours: it is postulated that the charged domain may be the
voltage sensor region, possibly moving outward on depolarisation, causing a
conformational change. This model, proposed by Noda et al. [2], contrasts
with that of Sato and Matsumoto [5], in which the TM segments are juxtaposed
octagonally. The basic structural motif (the 6-helix bundle) is also found
in potassium and calcium channel alpha subunits.

The SCN5A gene encodes the NaH1 channel and is expressed in cardiac muscle,
foetal skeletal muscle and denervated adult skeletal muscle [6]. Mutations
in the SCN5A gene affect the function of NaH1 channels in the heart and are
one of the three causes of Long QT syndrome, an inherited cardiac arrhythmia
that can cause abrupt loss of consciousness, seizures and sudden death [7]; 
it is also associated  with Brugada syndrome [8] and conduction system
disease [9].

NACHANNEL5 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
voltage-gated Na+ channel alpha 5 subunit. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the N-terminal third of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise the alpha-5 subunits but distinguish them from
the rest of the voltage-gated Na+ channel superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 
reside in the loop between TM domains 5 and 6 of the first repeat; motifs 
3-5 lie in the loop between TM domain 6 of the first repeat and TM domain 1
of the second repeat; and motifs 6 and 7 encompass the loop between TM 6 of
the second repeat and TM 1 of the third. A single iteration on SPTR40_18f
was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified
beyond the starting set.
