CGRPRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that   
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-   
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the   
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct   
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,   
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in   
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like   
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating   
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.       

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid   
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-   
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM'
signature.      

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a neuropeptide with diverse
biological effects including potent vasodilator activity [6]. Messenger RNA
for this receptor is predominantly expressed in the lung and heart, with
specific localisation to lung alveolar cells and cardiac myocytes [7]. In 
the rat lung, it is associated with blood vessels; the gene may therefore
play an important role in the maintenance of vascular tone [8]. mRNA is also
found in the cerebellum [9]. The ligand for this receptor-like protein 
remains to be discovered. 

CGRPRECEPTOR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
calcitonin gene-related peptide type 1 receptors. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length, focusing on 
those sections that characterise the CGRP receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the secretin-like GPCR superfamily - motifs 1-4 reside in
the N-terminal putative extracellular domain; motif 5 spans the first
external loop; and motifs 6 and 7 reside in the cytoplasmic C-terminus. A
single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
