LYSIN
Spermatozoa of the California red abalone (Haliotis rufescens) possess
an acrosomal protein that dissolves the egg vitelline layer during
fertilisation [1-4]. The dissolution mechanism is believed to be a
stoichiometric, non-enzymatic process that depends on the hydrophobic
nature of the sperm protein, which has been termed an egg-lysin [1].
The protein comprises 134 amino-acid residues, of which 36 are charged.
Most of these occur at distances of 2 or 3 residues from each other,
suggesting an amphipathic alpha-helical arrangement in which the
charged residues reside on one face of the helix and hydrophobic
residues occupy the opposite face [1]. A stretch of 41 amino acids
contains 10 positively charged and no negatively charged residues [1].

In addition to these amphipathic characteristics, the surface of the
protein exhibits two tracks of basic residues that span the length of 
the molecule, a solvent-exposed cluster of aromatic and aliphatic 
residues, and an extended N-terminal hypervariable domain [2].
Alternative conformations of the hypervariable N-terminus are thought
to play a role in species-specific receptor recognition [2-5]. 

The structures of the monomeric and dimeric forms of Haliotis rufescens 
lysin have been determined and refined to 1.35 and 2.07A, respectively
[5]. The fold consists of a closed bundle of helices with a right-hand
twist, in which alternate residue conformations contribute to the
amphipathic nature of the protein. Upon dimerisation, a basic cleft
is formed via a patch of basic residues in the dimer interface. This
arrangement of charged and hydrophobic residues may account for the
biological properties of lysin and the method by which it binds to
the egg vitelline envelope receptor and subsequently dissolves the 
egg envelope [5].

LYSIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for lysins.
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 9 sequences:
the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full 
alignment length - motif 1 spans helix 1; motif 2 spans helix 2 and
the preceding beta-turn; motifs 3-5 include helices 3-5 respectively;
and motif 6 spans helices 6 and 7. Two iterations on SPTR41_24f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising
25 sequences was identified.
