EXFOLTOXIN
The prokaryote Staphylococcus aureus is a well-characterised and specialised
human pathogen, expressing a variety of virulence factors to enable
successful infection of the host [1]. Symptoms usually manifest in cases of 
food poisoning, pyrogenic fever and toxic shock syndrome, and can prove 
lethal in immunocompromised patients [1]. Of all the exotoxins secreted from 
the bacterial cell, superantigens and hemolysins are amongst the most 
studied [1]. 

Of these, the former are well characterised, and several S.aureus super-
antigenic enterotoxins exist that trigger excessive and aberrant T-cell
activation in the host. Homologues of these S.aureus proteins have been 
found in Streptococcus pyogenes, and cause similar effects [2]. In 
conventional Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)-II-restricted antigen 
processing, a peptide epitope is presented to a specific T-cell receptor 
(TCR) by the antigen presenting cell, and up to 0.0001% of the host T-cell 
repertoire is activated [2]. By contrast, a bacterial superantigen (SAg) can 
bypass this process, binding non-specifically to constant regions on both 
the MHC-II and TCR [2]. This results in up to 25% of the total host T-cell 
population being activated, with a consequent massive release of 
inflammatory cytokines. 

A recent study into the origins and functions of the S.aureus and S.pyogenes
superantigens has identified distinct protein domains that are responsible 
for the slightly different actions of each protein subgroup [3]. Based on 
these criteria, the staphylococcal and streptococcal entero-/exotoxins 
discovered so far can be placed into several groups/subfamilies [3]. The 
EXFOL group contains those superantigens that cause exfoliative skin 
diseases in the human host, and shows some similarity to staphylococcal
serine proteases [4]. Although these proteins show no significant sequence
similarity to the more "conventional" SAgs, they do function in the same 
way, binding both TCR and MHC-II molecules [4]. 

The EXFOL group of exotoxins also possess potent serine protease activity, 
and contain a functional domain found in other S.aureus serine proteases 
[4]. To date, two distinct members of the subfamily have been characterised, 
both from S.aureus, and designated Exfoliative toxin A and B (Eta and Etb) 
[4]. The tertiary structure of Eta has been resolved to 1.7A using X-ray
crystallography [5]. This reveals that Eta contains unique "ETA-surface
loops", no cysteine bridges, and a specific N-terminal helix that is 
crucial for substrate hydrolysis [5]. 

EXFOLTOXIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
exfoliative toxins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans alpha-helix 4 and beta-
strands 2 and 3; motif 2 spans strands 4 and 5 and helices 5 and 6, and 
includes the active site histidine; motif 3 includes strand 8; motif 4 spans
strand 9 and helix 8, and includes the active site aspartic acid; motif 5 
spans helix 9 and strand 11; and motif 6 spans the C-terminus of strand 13,
helix 11, strand 14 and the N-terminus of strand 15, and contains the active
site serine. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
Several partial matches were found, all serine proteases that match motifs
2, 4 and 6, which contain the catalytic triad residues. 
