NURRNUCRCPTR
Steroid or nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) constitute an important super-
family of transcription regulators that are involved in widely diverse 
physiological functions, including control of embryonic development, cell
differentiation and homeostasis [1]. Members of the superfamily include the
steroid hormone receptors and receptors for thyroid hormone, retinoids, 
1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3 and a variety of other ligands. The proteins 
function as dimeric molecules in nuclei to regulate the transcription of 
target genes in a ligand-responsive manner [2,3]. In addition to C-terminal
ligand-binding domains, these nuclear receptors contain a highly-conserved,
N-terminal zinc-finger that mediates specific binding to target DNA 
sequences, termed ligand-responsive elements. In the absence of ligand,
steroid hormone receptors are thought to be weakly associated with nuclear
components; hormone binding greatly increases receptor affinity.

NRs are extremely important in medical research, a large number of them
being implicated in diseases such as cancer, diabetes, hormone resistance
syndromes, etc. [1]. While several NRs act as ligand-inducible transcription
factors, many do not yet have a defined ligand and are accordingly termed 
"orphan" receptors. During the last decade, more than 300 NRs have been
described, many of which are orphans, which cannot easily be named due to 
current nomenclature confusions in the literature. However, a new system 
has recently been introduced in an attempt to rationalise the increasingly 
complex set of names used to describe superfamily members [1].

A rat orphan nuclear hormone receptor, designated Nurr1 (Nur-related factor
1), has been isolated from a brain cortex cDNA library [4,5]. The protein
contains 598 amino acids and has a predicted molecular mass of 65kDa. The
deduced sequence shows strong similarity to the mouse Nurr1 and human NOT1
orphan nuclear hormone receptors of the NGFI-B/Nur77/NAK1 gene subfamily [4]. 

Rat nurr1 is thought to be an immediate-early gene that is differentially
induced by electroconvulsive seizure vs. kindled seizures [4]. As Nurr1 
appears to be predominantly located in brain tissue, it may have a role 
in regulation of gene expression in the central nervous system [5]. 
Moreover, given that Nurr1 is prominently expressed in specific brain sites 
associated with memory acquisition and consolidation, it may be involved
in memory processing [4].

NURRNUCRCPTR is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Nurr orphan nuclear receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the Nurr nuclear receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the nuclear receptor family - motifs 1-9 lie N-terminal to the zinc
finger domain; motifs 10 and 11 span a proline-rich region following the 
zinc fingers; and motif 12 resides at the C-terminus. A single iteration on 
SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being 
identified beyond the starting set. Several partial matches were found: 
Q16311 is a beta-type transcription factor homologue that lacks the first
motif; the rest are NOR nuclear receptors that match motifs 2 and 10. 
