TUBBYPROTEIN
A mutation in the mouse tub gene causes maturity-onset obesity, insulin 
resistance and sensory deficits [1,2]. By contrast with the rapid juvenile-
onset weight gain seen in diabetes (db) and obese (ob) mice, obesity in
tubby mice develops gradually, and strongly resembles the late-onset obesity
observed in the human population [2]. Excessive deposition of adipose tissue
culminates in a two-fold increase of body weight. Tubby mice also suffer
retinal degeneration and neurosensory hearing loss [2]. The tripartite
character of the tubby phenotype is highly similar to human obesity
syndromes, such as Alstrom and Bardet-Biedl [2]. Although these phenotypes
indicate a vital role for tubby proteins, no biochemical function has yet
been ascribed to any family member [3], although it has been suggested that
the phenotypic features of tubby mice may be the result of cellular 
apoptosis triggered by expression of the mutuated tub gene [2].

Mammalian tub is a hydrophilic protein of ~500 residues. The N-terminal
portion of the protein is conserved neither in length nor sequence, but the 
C-terminal 250 residues are highly conserved. The C-terminal extremity
contains a cysteine residue that might play an important role in the normal
functioning of these proteins.

Tubby-like proteins (TULPs), which share the tub C-terminal domain, are 
found in a wide range of multicellular organisms [2]. The crystal structure
of the C-terminal core domain from mouse tubby has been determined to 1.9A
resolution [3], revealing an alpha-beta protein with a barrel architecture.
Structural analyses suggest that TULPs constitute a unique family of 
bipartite transcription factors [3]. 

TUBBYPROTEIN is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
mammalian tubby protein. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment. Two iterations on 
SPTR39.22_17.3f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true
set comprising 3 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were
also found, all of which are tubby-like proteins that match motifs 2 and 3.
