GLY1TRNSPORT
Neurotransmitter transport systems are integral to the release, re-uptake
and recycling of neurotransmitters at synapses. High affinity tranport
proteins found in the plasma membrane of presynaptic nerve terminals and
glial cells are responsible for the removal from the extracellular space
of released-transmitters, thereby terminating their actions [1]. Plasma
membrane neurotransmitter transporters fall into two structurally and
mechanistically distinct families. The majority of the transporters
constitute an extensive family of homologous proteins that derive energy
from the co-transport of Na+ and Cl-, in order to transport neurotransmitter
molecules into the cell against their concentration gradient. The family 
has a common structure of 12 presumed transmembrane helices and includes 
carriers for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrenaline/adrenaline, 
dopamine, serotonin, proline, glycine, choline, betaine and taurine. They
are structurally distinct from the second more-restricted family of plasma
membrane transporters, which are responsible for excitatory amino acid
tranport. The latter couple glutamate and aspartate uptake to the co-
transport of Na+ and the counter-transport of K+, with no apparent
dependence on Cl- [2]. In addition, both of these transporter families
are distinct from the vesicular neurotransmitter transporters [3,4].

Sequence analysis of the Na+/Cl- neurotransmitter superfamily reveals that
it can be divided into four subfamilies, these being transporters for
monoamines, the amino acids proline and glycine, GABA, and a group of
orphan transporters [5].

Glycine is known to serve two contrasting roles as a neurotransmitter in
the central nervous system. Firstly, it serves as an inhibitory neuro-
transmitter in the spinal cord, brainstem and retina, where it activates a
ligand-gated Cl- channel. Secondly, it is an obligatory co-agonist for
activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor - unless glycine
is also bound to the NMDA receptor, glutamate cannot activate this ion
channel. Not surprisingly, then, plasma membranes possess glycine
transporters in order to regulate its concentration. Two independent genes
have been identified that encode Na+ and Cl- -coupled glycine transporters.
Their products, referred to as GLYT-1 and GLYT-2, have differing
distribution patterns within the central nervous system, suggesting they
may subserve unique functions [6]. Indeed the distribution of the GLYT-1
transporter suggests it may play a role in regulating glycine
concentrations in brain regions containing glycine-dependent NMDA receptors
[7]. Three different mRNA isoforms for GLYT-1 have been detected. These
arise as a result of differential splicing, or the usage of multiple
promoter sites. They encode transporters of 633, 638 and 692 amino acid
residues, all three having 50-60% similarity to other transporters in the
Na+ and Cl- -coupled neurotransmitter transporter superfamily.

GLY1TRNSPORT is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
glycine neurotransmitter transporter type 1 (GLYT-1). The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions located within the first third of the alignment,
focusing on those sections that characterise the glycine transporter
but distinguish it from others - motifs 1-2 reside within the putative
cytoplasmic N-terminus; and motifs 3-4 encode portions of the large
extracellular loop located between TM domains 3 and 4. Two iterations on
SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 4 sequences was identified.
