JNKMAPKINASE
MAP (Mitogen Activated Protein) kinases participate in kinase cascades,  
whereby at least 3 protein kinases act in series, culminating in activation 
of MAP kinase [1-2]. MAP kinases are activated by dual phosphorylation 
on both tyrosine and threonine residues of a conserved TXY motif.

JNK (Jun N-terminal Kinase), also known as Stress Activated Protein Kinase 
(SAPK), belongs to the family of MAP kinases. JNK was first identified in 
1990 as a microtubule-associated kinase from livers of cycloheximide-treated
rats [3]. Later, it was purified by absorption to a c-Jun fusion protein 
[4]. JNKs are activated by cytokines, certain ligands for GPCRs, agents 
that interfere with DNA and protein synthesis, and to some extent by 
growth factors, serum and transforming agents. Three genes have been 
identified in humans: JNK1, JNK2 and JNK3. Knockouts of these genes have 
revealed that either JNK1 or JNK2 must have an anti-apoptotic role [5].

JNKMAPKINASE is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
JNK MAP kinases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 9
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually 
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the 
JNK enzymes but distinguish them from the rest of the MAP kinase family -
motif 1 includes the C-terminus of alpha-helix 2; motif 2 spans beta-strand
8, helix 3 and the N-terminus of helix 4; motif 3 encodes the C-terminus of
helix 4; motif 5 includes the N-terminus of helix 5; motif 6 includes the
C-terminal two-thirds of helix 8; motif 7 includes helix 11; motif 8
includes helix 12; and motif 9 spans the C-terminus of helix 14 and helix 15.
Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 18 sequences was identified. Several partial
matches were also found: O44408 and O44182 are hypothetical proteins from 
C.elegans that match 3 or 4 motifs; and Q9XXV1 is a MAP kinase related 
protein from Tetrahymena pyriformis that matches 2 motifs.
