P2Y5ORPHANR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

A novel member of the GPCR superfamily has been cloned and named P2Y5 due 
to its similarity to the P2Y purinoceptor family [6]. However, initial 
experimental evidence suggesting that the receptor binds nucleotides has 
been contradicted by more recent studies, and the natural ligand for the
receptor therefore remains unknown [7,8]. Expression of the gene appears to 
be restricted to activated T cells and is induced by a number of T cell 
stimuli [6]. P2Y5 is the first example of a GPCR expressed specifically in 
activated T cells, the gene product possibly providing a link between T cell
growth factors and G protein activation [6]. 

P2Y5ORPHANR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
P2Y5 orphan receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the 
full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the P2Y5
receptors but distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like 
superfamily - motif 1 resides at the N-terminus; motif 2 spans the first
cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 lies in the second external loop; motif 4 spans
the C-terminus of TM domain 6, leading into the third external loop; 
motif 5 lies in the third external loop; and motif 6 resides at the 
C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL31.1 was required to reach convergence,
no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. A single 
partial match was found, P2Y9_HUMAN, an orphan receptor with high sequence
similarity to P2Y5, that matches motifs 1 and 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
