WNT3PROTEIN
Wnt proteins constitute a large family of secreted molecules that are
involved in intercellular signalling during development. The name derives
from the first 2 members of the family to be discovered: int-1 (mouse) and
wingless (Drosophila) [1]. It is now recognised that Wnt signalling controls
many cell fate decisions in a variety of different organisms, including
mammals [2]. Wnt signalling has been implicated in tumorigenesis, early
mesodermal patterning of the embryo, morphogenesis of the brain and kidneys,
regulation of mammary gland proliferation and Alzheimer's disease [3,4].

Wnt-mediated signalling is believed to proceed initially through binding to
cell surface receptors of the frizzled family; the signal is subsequently
transduced through several cytoplasmic components to B-catenin, which enters
the nucleus and activates the transcription of several genes important in
development [5]. More recently, however, several non-canonical Wnt
signalling pathways have been elucidated that act independently of
B-catenin [6]. Members of the Wnt gene family are defined by their sequence
similarity to mouse Wnt-1 and Wingless in Drosophila. They encode proteins
of ~350-400 residues in length, with orthologues identified in several,
mostly vertebrate, species. Very little is known about the structure of 
Wnts as they are notoriously insoluble; in terms of primary structure, the
family is characterised by a signal sequence and an almost invariant pattern
of 23-24 conserved cysteines [1]. Fifteen major Wnt gene families have been 
identified in vertebrates, with multiple subtypes within some classes.

The Wnt-3 gene was first identified in mouse in 1987, where it was found to
be expressed during embryogenesis and in adult brain. Insertion of proviral
DNA from mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) occurs at the mouse Wnt-3 locus,
leading to activation of the gene [7]. However, the human Wnt-3 gene was not
found to be amplified or rearranged in breast cancer tissues [8].

WNT3PROTEIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
Wnt-3 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the C-
terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that characterise
Wnt-3 proteins but distinguish them from related Wnt subtypes - the motifs
reside between a number of highly conserved cysteines. Two iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 6 sequences was identified. A single partial match was also 
found, Q8WS76, a putative WNT3 protein from Branchiostoma floridae (Florida 
lancelet) that fails to make a significant match with motif 2.
