CERATITISADH
Drosophila alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), an NAD(H)-dependent oxidoreductase,
is a member of the short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR) family. The
enzyme is homodimeric and catalyses the dehydrogenation of alcohols to their
respective ketones or aldehydes, both for metabolic assimilation and
detoxification purposes. 

Insect ADH is very different from yeast and mammalian ADHs. The enzyme from 
Drosophila lebanonensis has been characterised by protein analysis and was
found to have a 254-residue protein chain with an acetyl-blocked N-terminal
Met [1]. Comparisons with the enzyme from other species reveals that they
have diverged considerably. The structural variation within Drosophila is 
about as large as that for mammalian zinc-containing alcohol dehydrogenase.

The crystal structure of the apo form of Drosophila ADH has been solved to
1.9A resolution [2]. Each ADH subunit is revealed to have a mono-domain 
alpha/beta structure, with a characteristic NAD(H)-binding Rossmann fold.
The polypeptide chain folds into a central 8-stranded beta-sheet, flanked 
on each side by 3 alpha-helices. The dimers have local 2-fold symmetry and
essentially associate via a 4-helix bundle. Three structural features 
characterise the active site architecture: (i) a deep cavity, covered by a
flexible 33-residue loop and an 11-residue C-terminal tail of the 
neighbouring subunit, whose hydrophobic surface is likely to increase the
specificity of the enzyme for secondary aliphatic alcohols; (ii) the 
Ser-Tyr-Lys residues of the catalytic triad are known to be involved in
enzymatic catalysis; and (iii) 3 well-ordered water molecules in hydrogen 
bonding distance of side-chains of the catalytic triad may be significant
for the proton release steps in the catalysis. 

A number of proteins within the SDR family share a strong phylogenetic
relationship with insect ADH. Amongst these are Drosophila ADH-related
protein (duplicate of Adh or Adh-dup) [3]; Drosophila fat body protein
[4]; and development-specific 25kDa protein from Sarcophaga peregrina [5].

CERATITISADH is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for ADH
from Ceratitis capitata. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise the Ceratitis ADH but distinguish it from the rest of the
ADH family - motif 1 includes the putative nucleotide binding site. A single 
iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. A single partial match
was found, an ADH from Sarcophaga peregrina that matches motifs 3 and 9.
