NUCEPIMERASE
Carbohydrates are used for a wide variety of functions in animals, plants 
and microbes. As well as providing the main energy source for most organisms,
carbohydrates are ideally suited for molecular recognition [1]. For example, 
the stereochemistry of each hydroxyl substituent in a simple six-carbon six- 
oxygen pyranose ring can be varied to give up to 10 different molecules [1].
An organism's ability to change and control the stereochemistry of moieties
like glucose and galactose is, therefore, important.

Epimerases or "dehydratases", enzymes that catalyse these changes in 
carbohydrates, exist in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The processes they 
arbitrate are known as "epimerisation" and are involved in many metabolic 
pathways [2]. For example, the UDP-galactose epimerase in Arabidopsis 
thaliana mediates the reversible epimerisation of UDP-galactose, and is 
considered essential for this reason, providing a secondary growth 
metabolite to glucose [2]. 

Bacterial homologues of the mouse-ear cress epimerase are involved in the 
synthesis of extracellular polysaccharide capsule components, as well as 
metabolic pathways [3]. For this reason, they are considered virulence 
factors if present in a pathogenic strain. Vibrio vulnificus, the causative
agent of septicemia and infectious disease from contaminated seafood, relies 
on a thick polysaccharide capsule to evade host immune cells [3]. Epimerase
deletion mutants were unable to infect a mouse model, suggesting that the
gene is essential for bacterial virulence. Deletion studies with other
capsular pathogens, like Staphylococcus aureus, have shown that the
epimerase enzyme is needed for capsule polysaccharide formation and,
ultimately, virulence [4].

NUCEPIMERASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
nucleotide sugar epimerase family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment(~350 amino acids).
Three iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 27 sequences was identified. Three partial 
matches were also found (Q9HSV1, Q9HSU9, O06402), Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
and Halobacterium spp. nucleotide sugar epimerases/dehydratases that failed
to match motifs 1 and 3. 
