TOPISMRASE4B
Topoisomerases catalyse the interconversion of topological isomers of DNA
and play a key role in DNA metabolism [1]. Topoisomerase I catalyses an ATP-
independent reaction, while topoisomerase II catalyses an ATP-dependent
reaction, resulting in the formation of DNA supercoils [1-3]. The supercoil
is formed by transient cleavage in both strands of double-stranded DNA,
followed by the passage of a segment of DNA through the break, and break
ligation [3]. Eukaryotic enzymes can form both positive and negative
supercoils, while prokaryotic enzymes form only negative supercoils.

Eukaryotic topoisomerase II exists as a homodimer; in bacteriophage T4 it 
consists of 3 heterologous subunits; in prokaryotes it exists as a tetramer
of 2 subunits (2 each of gyrA and gyrB); and in E.coli, a second type II
topoisomerase, involved in chromosome segregation (topoisomerase IV),
consists of 2 subunits (parC and parE). GyrB, parE, and the product of 
bacteriophage T4 gene 39, are all similar to the eukaryotic proteins [1-3].

Investigations have shown that full-length ParC and ParE are required to
reconstitute Topo IV activity, while truncated ParC and ParE are inactive 
[4]. Topo IV activity is inhibited by quinolone and coumarin antibiotics, 
but the concentrations required for 50% inhibition of activity are 3-30-fold
higher than those required to inhibit DNA gyrase [4]. Norfloxacin-induced 
DNA cleavage patterns of Topo IV and DNA gyrase are distinct, but over-
lapping. The native forms of ParC and ParE are respectively a dimer and a
monomer, while the active form of Topo IV is a heterotetramer, ParC2ParE2. 
It is thought that the inactivity of truncated forms of ParC and ParE might
be attributed to their failure to form the heterotetramer [4]. 

TOPISMRASE4B is a 15-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
topoisomerase IV subunit B. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those regions that
characterise topoisomerase IV but distinguish it from closely related
members of the topoisomerase II family. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 4
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, a
topoisomerase IV subunit B fragment from Vibrio cholerae that matches 
motifs 9-12.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences, and 4
partial matches.
