HYPOXIAIF1A
Hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1alpha) is a basic-helix-loop-helix-
PAS (bHLH-PAS) protein. It is an obligatory component of hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 (HIF-1), which exists as a heterodimer of HIF-1alpha and another
bHLH-PAS protein, the arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(HIF-1beta, ARNT) [1,2]. HIF-1 acts to regulate the response to hypoxia,
both at the cellular and system (body) level. On binding to DNA, it increases
the expression of genes that encode glycolytic enzymes, certain glucose
transporters, erythropoietin, and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Thus it acts at the cellular level to promote glycolysis, and at the
organ and body level to promote red blood cell production, and formation of
new blood vessels. Besides being stimulated by low oxygen conditions, HIF-1
activity has also been found to be stimulated by insulin and insulin-like
growth factor-1; however, the mechanism(s) whereby any of these agents can
promote its activity remain to be determined [3].

HIF-1 induction has also been implicated in the vascularisation of tumours,
which depend for their survival on the recruitment of new blood microvessels,
in part through angiogenic factors such as VEGF. Furthermore, recent
molecular studies of cancer have suggested that HIF-1alpha may have a role
in regulating hypoxic control of cell growth and apoptosis, suggesting there
may be an interplay between it and tumour supressors such as p53, and other
apoptotic regulators, including p21 and Bcl-2 [4,5].

HYPOXIAIF1A is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for hypoxia
inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1alpha). The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions within the N-terminal half of the alignment - motif 1 lies between 
PAS repeats 1 and 2; and motifs 2-4 reside between the PAC-motif and a
poly-threonine motif. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was 
identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences.
