ANPHYLATOXNR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The accumulation of phagocytic cells at the site of injury or infection is
regulated by substances that stimulate chemotaxis, granule secretion,
superoxide generation and upregulation of cell surface adhesion molecules
in cells of the immune system [6]. The chemoattractant substances include
C5a, N-formylmethionyl-containing peptides, interleukin 8, leukotriene B4
and platelet activating factor, many of which participate in anaphylactoid
and septic shock [6]. The C5a receptor is found on cells of the immune
system (e.g., neutrophils, macrophages, mast cells and related cell lines),
and is also present in smooth muscle. The amino acid sequence of the
receptor contains several N-terminal acidic residues, which may be
involved in binding the basic C5a peptide.

An orphan GPCR with 37% nucleotide identity to the C5a receptor [6] has 
been identified [7]. By contrast with C5aR and other GPCRs, a novel feature
of the gene product is the presence of an unusually large predicted extra-
cellular loop, containing in excess of 160 amino acid residues, between
TM domains 4 and 5 [7]. In human tissues, expression of mRNA for this 
receptor is similar to, but distinct from C5aR expression [7]. Although
there are some differences, transcripts for both receptors are detected
in tissues throughout the body and the central nervous system [7]. This
novel gene has been shown to encode the human anaphylatoxin C3a receptor 
[7]. The C3aR appears to be widely expressed in different lymphoid tissues,
providing evidence for a central role of the C3a anaphylatoxin in 
inflammatory processes [8]. 

ANPHYLATOXNR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
anaphylatoxin receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the anaphylatoxin receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies in the second 
cytoplasmic loop; motif 2 resides at the C-terminus of TM domain 4, leading
into the second external loop; motif 3 spans the C-terminus of the second
external loop, leading into TM domain 5; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of 
TM domain 5 and part of the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 5 lies at the
C-terminus of TM domain 7, leading into the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain.
Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 10 sequences was identified. 
