KIR13CHANNEL
Potassium channels are found in virtually all cell types. Their pore-
forming subunits fall into three structural families, i.e. those possessing
six, four and two transmembrane (TM) domains. The six-TM domain K+ channels
can be further subdivided into six families: the voltage-gated K+ channels
(Kv), the KCNQ channels, the eag-like K+ channels, and three Ca2+-activated
K+ channels. Inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir) are the principal class
of two-TM domain K+ channels, and the recently-discovered two-pore domain
K+ channels, make up a family of four-TM domain K+ channels.

Inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) are responsible for regulating
diverse processes including: cellular excitability, vascular tone, heart
rate, renal salt flow, and insulin release [1]. To date, around twenty
members of this superfamily have been cloned, which can be grouped into six
families by sequence similarity - these are designated Kir1.x-7.x [2,3].

Cloned Kir channel cDNAs encode proteins of between ~370-500 residues,
containing two predicted TM domains, with the characteristic K+ channel
pore-forming domain located between them. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be cytoplasmic, and the N-terminus lacks a signal sequence. It is thought
that four Kir subunits assemble to form a tetrameric channel complex, which
may be hetero- or homomeric [1].

Kir1.3 (also known as Kir4.2) was cloned from human kidney, where it appears
to be found most abundantly. At lower levels, it has also been detected in
the pancreas and lung. It is most closely related to Kir1.2, to which it is
62% identical. Unlike the other Kir1.x family members, in the Kir1.3
sequence, the Walker Type A consensus motif (for nucleotide binding) is
not conserved. Heterologous expression of Kir1.3 in Xenopus oocytes did not
lead to detectable channel activity. Indeed, co-expression of Kir1.3 with
either Kir1.1 or Kir1.2 reduced currents resulting from expression of these
inward rectifier subunits alone, consistent with a dominant negative
influence of Kir1.3 on Kir1.1 and Kir1.2 expression [4].

KIR13CHANNEL is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kir1.3 inward rectifer K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise Kir1.3 but distinguish if from other subtypes -
motifs 1-3 lie within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; and motifs 4-8
encode portions of the cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single iteration on
SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.
