TRACEAMINE1R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Tyramine, beta-phenylethylamine, tryptamine and octopamine are biogenic
amines present in trace levels in mammalian nervous systems. Although some
"trace amines" have clearly defined roles as neurotransmitters in
invertebrates, the extent to which they function as true neurotransmitters
in vertebrates has remained speculative [6]. Recently, however, a novel
family of G protein-coupled receptors that share sequence similarity with
the classical amine receptors has been discovered. Members of this family
have been shown to act as receptors for tyramine and beta-phenylethylamine,
supporting a role for trace amines as neurotransmitters in vertebrates [6].

Trace amine receptor 1 (TA1) is potently activated by tyramine and
beta-phenylethylamine, and displays low affinity for tryptamine, octopamine
and dopamine. It is expressed at low to moderate levels in peripheral
tissues such as the stomach, kidney and lung, and within the central nervous
system is restricted predominantly to the amygdala [6].

TRACEAMINE1R is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
trace amine receptor 1. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those areas that
characterise trace amine receptor 1 but distinguish it from the rest of the
trace amine receptor family - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; motif 2
encodes part of the second cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM domain 4;
motifs 3 and 4 span the N- and C-terminal portions of TM domain 5; motif 5
is located in the third external loop, leading into TM domain 7; and motif 6
resides at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the 
starting set.
