ALCDHDRGNASE
Drosophila alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), an NAD(H)-dependent oxidoreductase,
is a member of the short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR) family. The
enzyme is homodimeric and catalyses the dehydrogenation of alcohols to their
respective ketones or aldehydes, both for metabolic assimilation and
detoxification purposes. 

Insect ADH is very different from yeast and mammalian ADHs. The enzyme from 
Drosophila lebanonensis has been characterised by protein analysis and was
found to have a 254-residue protein chain with an acetyl-blocked N-terminal
Met [1]. Comparisons with the enzyme from other species reveals that they
have diverged considerably. The structural variation within Drosophila is 
about as large as that for mammalian zinc-containing alcohol dehydrogenase.

The crystal structure of the apo form of Drosophila ADH has been solved to
1.9A resolution [2]. Each ADH subunit is revealed to have a mono-domain 
alpha/beta structure, with a characteristic NAD(H)-binding Rossmann fold.
The polypeptide chain folds into a central 8-stranded beta-sheet, flanked 
on each side by 3 alpha-helices. The dimers have local 2-fold symmetry and
essentially associate via a 4-helix bundle. Three structural features 
characterise the active site architecture: (i) a deep cavity, covered by a
flexible 33-residue loop and an 11-residue C-terminal tail of the 
neighbouring subunit, whose hydrophobic surface is likely to increase the
specificity of the enzyme for secondary aliphatic alcohols; (ii) the 
Ser-Tyr-Lys residues of the catalytic triad are known to be involved in
enzymatic catalysis; and (iii) 3 well-ordered water molecules in hydrogen 
bonding distance of side-chains of the catalytic triad may be significant
for the proton release steps in the catalysis. 

ALCDHDRGNASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for insect
alcohol dehydrogenases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 13 sequences. The motifs were drawn from short conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those 
sections that characterise the ADHs but distinguish them from the rest of
the SDR family: motif 1 spans the loop between strand 2 and helix 2; motif 2
encodes strand 3; motif 3 spans helices 5 and 6; motif 4 encodes the C-
terminus of helix 9 and strand 6; motif 5 spans strand 8 and helix 12; and
motif 6 encodes strands 9 and 10. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 63 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found: a subset of ADH-related
proteins match 3 motifs, and the development-specific 25kDa protein from
Sarcophaga peregrina matches 2 motifs.
