FISHGLOBIN
Globins are haem-containing proteins involved in dioxygen binding and/or 
transport [1]. Hundreds of globin sequences are known [2]. It has been 
proposed that all globins have evolved from a family of ancestral, ~17kDa 
haemoproteins that displayed the globin fold and functioned as redox 
proteins [3]. The globin superfamily includes vertebrate haemoglobins (Hb); 
vertebrate myoglobins (Mb); invertebrate globins; plant leghaemoglobins; and 
bacterial flavohaemoglobins. 

The function of haemoglobins (Hb) is transport of dioxygen in blood plasma.
Lampreys have Hbs with self-association and ligand-binding properties that
are very different from those characteristic of the tetrameric Hbs of 
higher vertebrates [5]. Monomeric, ligated lamprey Hb self-associates to 
dimers and tetramers on deoxygenation; dissociation to monomers on 
oxygenation accounts for the cooperative binding of O(2) and its pH 
dependence [5]. Adult erythrocytes of Mordacia mordax, a southern 
hemisphere lamprey, contain three monomeric haemoglobins that are closely 
related to hag-fish haemoglobins [6]. 

The 3D structures of a great number of vertebrate Hbs in various states
are known. The protein is largely alpha-helical, eight conserved helices (A 
to H) providing the scaffold for a well-defined haem-binding pocket. The 
imidazole ring of the "proximal" His residue provides the fifth haem iron 
ligand; the other axial haem iron position remains essentially free for O(2) 
coordination. 

The crystal structure of deoxygenated lamprey hemoglobin V has been 
determined by molecular replacement to 2.7A resolution, in a crystal form 
with twelve protomers in the asymmetric unit [7]. The subunits are arranged 
as identical dimers, their interface comprising non-polar interactions and a 
cluster of four glutamate residues contributed by the E helices and the AB 
corner - the Bohr effect seems to result from proton uptake by the inter-
facial glutamate residues [7]. By contrast with human and mollusc Hbs, where 
modulation of function results primarily from proximal effects, regulation 
of oxygen affinity in lamprey Hb V seems to depend on changes at the distal 
(ligand-binding) side of the haem group [7].

FISHGLOBIN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for lamprey 
and hagfish globins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length. Three iterations on SPTR44_27f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 12 
sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found: Q7SID0, a 
transport protein from the inshore hagfish that fails to make a significant 
match with motif 5; and Q9Y0D5, a haemoglobin from the Atlantic hagfish that 
fails to make significant matches with motifs 1, 5 and 6.
