ERK1ERK2MAPK
MAP (Mitogen Activated Protein) kinases participate in kinase cascades,  
whereby at least 3 protein kinases act in series, culminating in activation 
of MAP kinase [1-2]. MAP kinases are activated by dual phosphorylation 
on both tyrosine and threonine residues of a conserved TXY motif.

ERKs (Extracellularly Regulated Kinases) belong to the family of MAP 
kinases. ERK1 and ERK2, proteins of 43 and 41kDa respectively, are ~85% 
identical, even higher levels of similarity being seen in substrate binding 
regions [3]. Both are ubiquitously expressed, although levels vary from 
tissue to tissue. They are activated, for example, by serum, growth factors 
and cytokines. They phosphorylate both cytoskeletal proteins and 
transcription factors, resulting ultimately in cell growth. Substrates carry
a PX(T/S)P motif; other such "docking domains" also exist within ERK, which 
interact with specific motifs in the substrate: e.g., ERK1 and ERK2 possess 
2 DXXD docking sites capable of interaction with a Kinase Interaction Motif 
(KIM), which can be found on activators (MAPKK), inhibitors (PTP-SL and dual
specificity phosphatases) and substrates (Elk-1) [4].

ERK1ERK2MAPK is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
ERK1/2 MAP kinases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 
5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the 
ERK1/2 enzymes but distinguish them from the rest of the MAP kinase family
- motif 1 includes alpha-helix 1 and the N-terminus of beta-strand 1; motif
2 encodes the N-terminus of helix 4; motif 3 includes helix 6; motif 4 spans
helix 10; motif 5 includes the N-terminus of helix 12; and motif 6 includes
helix 17. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 12 sequences was identified. Several 
partial matches were also found: O35558, murine ERK2, failed to match motifs
5 and 6 and is probably a fragment; and FUS3_YEAST and ERK1_CANAL are yeast
MAP kinases that matched only motifs 2 and 6.
