BACE1
One of the major neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD)
is the progressive formation in the brain of insoluble amyloid plaques and 
vascular deposits consisting of beta-amyloid protein (beta-APP) [1].
Production of beta-APP requires proteolytic cleavage of the large type-1 
transmembrane (TM) protein amyloid precursor protein (APP) [2]. This process
is performed by a variety of enzymes known as secretases. To initiate 
beta-APP formation, beta-secretase cleaves APP to release a soluble 
N-terminal fragment (APPsBeta) and a C-terminal fragment that remains 
membrane bound. This fragment is subsequently cleaved by gamma-secretase 
to liberate beta-APP.

Several independent studies identified a novel TM aspartic protease as the
major beta-secretase [3,4,5]. This protein, termed beta-site APP cleaving
enzyme 1 (BACE1), shares 64% amino acid sequence similarity with a second
enzyme, termed BACE2. Together, BACE1 and BACE2 define a novel family of 
aspartyl proteases [6]. Both enzymes share significant sequence similarity
with other members of the pepsin family of aspartyl proteases and contain 
the two characteristic D(T/S)G(T/S) motifs that form the catalytic site.
However, by contrast with other aspartyl proteases, BACE1 and BACE2 are
type I TM proteins. Each protein comprises a large lumenal domain containing
the active centre, a single TM domain and a small cytoplasmic tail.

BACE1, also termed Asp2 and memapsin-2, has a broad tissue distribution, 
with brain expression levels moderately higher than those of peripheral 
tissues [3]. Mice deficient in BACE1 are healthy, fertile, and appear normal
in gross anatomy, tissue histology and clinical chemistry [7]. BACE1 -/- 
mice that are also hemizygous for an amyloid precursor protein transgene 
lack brain beta-amyloid and beta-secretase-cleaved APP C-terminal fragments
[7]. These findings substantiate the theory that BACE1 acts as the major 
beta-secretase in vivo, and suggest that therapeutic inhibition of BACE1 as
a potential treatment for Alzheimer's disease may be free of mechanism-
based toxicity.

BACE1 is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for beta-site APP
cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1). The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise BACE1 but distinguish it from other BACE family members.
Two iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 12 sequences was identified. Two partial matches
were also found, both of which are BACE family members that fail to make
significant matches with 3 or more motifs.
