MELNOCORTN5R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH), melanocyte-stimulating hormones (MSH) and
beta-endorphin are peptide products of pituitary pro-opiomelanocortin.
ACTH regulates synthesis and release of glucocorticoids and aldosterone
in the adrenal cortex; it also has a trophic action on these cells [6]. 
ACTH and beta-endorphin are synthesised and released in response to 
corticotrophin-releasing factor at times of stress (heat, cold, infections,
etc.) - their release leads to increased metabolism and analgesia res..
MSH has a trophic action on melanocytes, and regulates pigment production
in fish and amphibia [6]. The ACTH receptor is found in high levels in
the adrenal cortex - binding sites are present in lower levels in the
CNS. The MSH receptor is expressed in high levels in melanocytes, 
melanomas and their derived cell lines [6]. Receptors are found in low
levels in the CNS. MSH regulates temperature control in the septal region
of the brain and releases prolactin from the pituitary.

A further gene, which encodes a melanocortin receptor that is functionally
distinct from the ACTH and MSH receptors, has also been characterised [7-11].
The protein contains ~300 amino acids, with calculated molecular mass of 
~36 KDa, and potential N-linked glycosylation and phosphorylation sites
[8]. The melanocortin 5 receptor (MC5-R) mediates increase in cAMP 
accumulation with a characteristic pharmacology [10]. Very low expression
levels have been detected in brain, while high levels are found in adrenals,
stomach, lung and spleen [10]. In situ hybridisation studies have also shown
the MC5 receptor to be expressed in the three layers of the adrenal cortex,
predominantly in the aldosterone-producing zona glomerulosa cells [10]. 
Structure-activity studies have indicated that N- and C-terminal portions
of alpha-MSH appear to be key determinants in the activation of mouse 
MC5R, while the melanocortin core heptapeptide sequence is devoid of
pharmacological activity [11]. 

MELNOCORTN5R is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
melanocortin 5 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise the melanocortin 5 receptors but distinguish them from the
rest of the melanocortin receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 lie at the 
N-terminus; motif 3 lies in the first external loop; motif 4 spans the third
cytoplasmic loop; and motif 5 lies at the C-terminus. Two iterations on
OWL27.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 8 sequences was identified. Three partial matches were also
found, AB012211, MC4R_HUMAN and MC4R_RAT, all of which are melanocortin 4 
receptors match motifs 4 and 5.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
