TNFACTORR25
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 25 (alternatively known as death receptor 3 (DR3) and 
lymphocyte-associated receptor of death (LARD)) is expressed primarily on 
the surface of thymocytes and lymphocytes [7]. The receptor contains a death
domain in its C-terminal region, and acts as a key regulator of life/death 
decisions during thymocyte development [8].

TNFACTORR25 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 25. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise TNF receptor 25 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motifs 1 and 2 lie in the extracellular N-terminal region; motifs
3 and 4 reside within the intracellular C-terminal region; and motif 5 lies
within the death domain in the intracellular C-terminal region. Two 
iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were 
also found, Q8VD70_MOUSE and B3KSV7_HUMAN, which are translated cDNA 
sequences from mouse and human that fail to make significant matches with 
motif 2, and with motifs 1 and 2, respectively.
