FIMBRIALPAPE
The Gram-negative pathogen Escherichia coli causes several common bacterial 
illnesses in humans, including diarrhoea, neonatal meningitidis and urinary 
tract infections. Attachment to host tissues is essential for successful 
invasion, and requires interaction between a bacterial adhesive protein and 
its target receptor. This protein is usually supported on a larger structure 
made up of heteropolymeric fibres [1]. Pyelonephritogenic E.coli
specifically invade the uroepithelium by expressing between 100 and 300 
pili on their cell surface. Pili are macromolecular structures that allow 
binding to a digalactoside receptor in the urinary tract.

P pili, or fimbriae, are ~68A in diameter and 1 micron in length, the
bulk of which is a fibre composed of the main structural protein PapA [1].
At its tip, the pilus is terminated by a fibrillum consisting of repeating
units of the PapE protein. This, in turn, is topped by the adhesins, PapF
and PapG, both of which are needed for receptor binding. The tip fibrillum 
is anchored to the main PapA fibre by the PapK pilus-adaptor protein. PapH,
an outer membrane protein, then anchors the entire rod in the bacterial
envelope [2]. A cytoplasmic chaperone (PapD) assists in assembling the
monomers of the macromolecule in the membrane. 

PapE can vary its structure and antigenic properties according to the 
serotype strain of bacteria [3], and therefore has the ability to evade 
host immune responses. A recent study into the assembly of P pili [4] 
showed that both PapA and PapE automatically self-assemble into pilus 
rods and tip fibrillae, respectively, once released from the PapD chaperone. 

FIMBRIALPAPE is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Escherichia coli P pili tip fibrillum papE protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~175 amino acids).
Two iterations on SPTR37_14f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified. 
