YAJCTRNLCASE
Secretion across the inner membrane in some Gram-negative bacteria occurs 
via the preprotein translocase pathway. Proteins are produced in the 
cytoplasm as precursors, and require a chaperone subunit to direct them to 
the translocase component [1]. From there, the mature proteins are either
targeted to the outer membrane, or remain as periplasmic proteins [1]. The 
translocase protein subunits are encoded on the bacterial chromosome. 

The translocase itself comprises 7 proteins, including a chaperone (SecB), 
ATPase (SecA), an integral membrane complex (SecY, SecE and SecG), and two 
additional membrane proteins that promote the release of the mature peptide 
into the periplasm (SecD and SecF) [1]. Other cytoplasmic/periplasmic 
proteins play a part in preprotein translocase activity, namely YidC and 
YajC [2]. The latter is bound in a complex to SecD and SecF, and plays a
part in stabilising and regulating secretion through the SecYEG integral
membrane component via SecA [2]. 

Homologues of the YajC gene have been found in a range of pathogenic and 
commensal microbes. Brucella abortis YajC- and SecD-like proteins were shown
to stimulate a Th1 cell-mediated immune response in mice, and conferred 
protection when challenged with B.abortis [3]. Therefore, these proteins may
have an antigenic role as well as a secretory one in virulent bacteria [3].
A number of previously uncharacterised "hypothetical" proteins also show
similarity to E.coli YajC, suggesting that this family is wider than first 
thought [3].

More recently, the precise interactions between the E.coli SecYEG complex, 
SecD, SecF, YajC and YidC have been studied [4]. Rather than acting 
individually, the four proteins form a heterotetrameric complex and 
associate with the SecYEG heterotrimeric complex [4]. The SecF and YajC 
subunits link the complex to the integral membrane translocase.

YAJCTRNLCASE is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial YajC preprotein translocases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 12 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length. Five iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 39 sequences was identified. Six partial matches were also
found, all of which appear to be related proteins that failed to make a 
significant match with motif 1.
