TNFACTORR12
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 12 (also known as TWEAK receptor, and fibroblast growth 
factor-inducible-14 (Fn14)) has been implicated in endothelial cell growth
and migration [7]. The receptor may also play a role in cell-matrix 
interactions [8].

TNFACTORR12 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour 
necrosis factor receptor 12. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise TNF receptor 12 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor
subtypes - motifs 1 and 2 lie within the extracellular N-terminal region,
and motif 3 resides within the intracellular C-terminal region. Two 
iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified.
