RTXTOXINA
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. Four principal exotoxin secretion systems have been described
[1]. In the type II and IV secretion systems, toxins are first exported to
the periplasm by way of a cleaved N-terminal signal sequence; a second set
of proteins is used for extracellular transport (type II), or the C-terminus
of the exotoxin itself is used (type IV). Type III secretion involves at 
least 20 molecules that assemble into a needle; effector proteins are then 
translocated through this without need of a signal sequence. In the Type I 
system, a complete channel is formed through both membranes, and the 
secretion signal is carried on the C-terminus of the exotoxin. 

The RTX (repeats in toxin) family of cytolytic toxins belong to the Type I 
secretion system, and are important virulence factors in Gram-negative 
bacteria. As well as the C-terminal signal sequence, several glycine-rich
repeats are also found. These are essential for binding calcium, and are 
critical for the biological activity of the secreted toxins [2,3]. All RTX
toxin operons exist in the order rtxCABD, RtxA protein being the structural
component of the exotoxin, both RtxB and D being required for its export
from the bacterial cell; RtxC is an acyl-carrier-protein-dependent acyl-
modification enzyme, required to convert RtxA to its active form [4].

Escherichia coli hemolysin (HlyA) is often quoted as the model for RTX 
toxins. Recent work on its relative rtxC gene product HlyC [5] has revealed 
that it provides the acylation aspect for post-translational modification
of two internal lysine residues in the HlyA protein. To cause pathogenicity,
the HlyA toxin must first bind Ca2+ ions to the set of glycine-rich repeats
and then be activated by HlyC [6]. This has been demonstrated both in 
vitro and in vivo [6].

RTXTOXINA is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the Gram-
negative bacterial RTX toxin determinant A family. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the central portion of the alignment - motif 1 
lies within the first putative transmembrane (TM) region; motif 2 lies
between putative TM domains 2 and 3; motif 3 encodes the C-terminus of the
third TM region; motif 6 contains the palmitate attachment site; and motif 7
spans 3 calcium-binding repeats. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 23 sequences was
identified. 
