SURFCEANTIGN
Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular apicomplexan protozoan 
parasite, with a complex lifestyle involving varied hosts [1]. It has two 
phases of growth: an intestinal phase in feline hosts, and an extra- 
intestinal phase in other mammals. Oocysts from an infected cat develop 
into tachyzoites and, eventually, into bradyzoites and zoitocysts in the 
extraintestinal host [1]. Transmission of the parasite occurs through 
contact with infected cats or raw/undercooked meat. In immunocompromised 
individuals, it can cause severe, often lethal, toxoplasmosis. Acute 
infection in healthy humans can also cause tissue damage in some cases [1].

The protozoan utilises a variety of secretory and antigenic proteins to 
invade a host and gain access to the intracellular environment [2]. It 
expresses a plethora of surface antigens, as varied as the hosts it can 
infect. Most of these fall into two categories, termed SAG1 or SAG2 [3].
Genes encoding the surface antigens are scattered throughout the T.gondii 
genome, showing little polymorphism at each locus [3]. The major surface 
antigen, P30, has been found in all isolated virulent strains of the 
protozoan and also shows similarity to SAG1 and SAG2 proteins [4].

Recently, three novel members of the SAG1 surface protein family have been 
found at the newly-described SAG5 locus; they are anchored to the cell 
membrane by glycosylphosphatidylinositol [5]. Mutational studies have 
indicated these antigens to be essential for virulence and that they 
are controlled at the post-transcriptional level. 

SURFCEANTIGN is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
protozoan surface antigens. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all
Neospora or Toxoplasma gondii surface antigens that failed to match three
or more motifs.
