TRHRFAMILY
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
          
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 
          
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (thyroliberin) (TRH) stimulates synthesis and
release of thyroid-stimulating hormone in the anterior pituitary [6]. It
also stimulates synthesis and release of prolactin. In the CNS, TRH
stimulates a number of behavioural and pharmacological actions, including
increased turnover of catecholamines in the nucleus accumbens [6].

TRHRFAMILY is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor family. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved sections within loop and TM regions, focusing on those areas of
the alignment that characterise the thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptors
but distinguish them from the rest of rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1
encodes the C-terminal portion of TM domain 2 and the first external loop;
motif 2 spans the external and central regions of TM domain 3; motif 3 is
located in the N-terminal section of TM domain 5; motif 4 resides at the
C-terminus of TM domain 5; motif 5 encodes the N-terminal portion of TM
domain 6; motif 6 spans the third external loop; motif 7 resides in the
external and central sections of TM domain 7; and motif 8 lies in the
initial portion of the C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 14
sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also found: Q9VDC4 and
Q95YD7, receptors from D.melanogaster and C.elegans, respectively, that
are most closely related to the thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptors and
may be members of the family.
