RVDCCALPHA1
Calcium channel proteins are involved in the control of neurotransmitter
release from neurons [1], and play an important role in the regulation of a
variety of cellular functions, including membrane excitability, muscle
contraction and synaptic transmission [2]. Voltage-gated calcium channels
are classified as T, L, N, P, Q and R, and are distinguished by their
sensitivity to pharmacological blocks, single-channel conductance kinetics,
and voltage-dependence. On the basis of their voltage activation
properties, the voltage-gated calcium classes can be further divided into
two broad groups: the low (T-type) and high (L, N, P, Q and R-type)
threshold-activated channels [3].

Generally, the channel proteins are composed of 4 tightly-coupled subunits
(alpha-1, alpha-2, beta and gamma), the alpha-1 subunit from each creating
the pore for the import of extracellular calcium ions. The alpha-1 subunit
shares sequence characteristics with all voltage-dependent cation channels,
and exploits the same 6-helix bundle structural motif - in both sodium and
calcium channels, this motif is repeated 4 times within the sequence to give
a 24-helix bundle. Within each of these repeats, 5 of the transmembrane (TM)
segments (S1, S2, S3, S5, S6) are hydrophobic and one is positively charged
(S4) - the latter is characterised by charged amino acids at very third
position, and probably represents the voltage-sensor.

Several genes encoding alpha-1 subunits have been identified, each forming
a distinct electrophysiological channel [4]. R-type calcium channels are
composed of alpha-1E subunits and are found in a variety of neuronal
populations, such as cerebellar granule neurons and dendrites of hippocampal
pyrimidal neurons [5]. They are believed to play an important role in the
body's natural communication network, where they contribute to the 
regulation of brain function by synaptic integration [6]. Their hypolarised
inactivation range and rapid kinetics of inactivation make R-type channels
more suited to providing a transient surge of Ca2+ influx [6,7].

RVDCCALPHA1 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
R-type voltage-dependent calcium channel alpha-1 subunit. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment: motifs
1 and 2 lie in the extracellular region between TM domains 5 and 6 of repeat
I; motif 3 resides in the cytoplasmic region between TM domain 6 of repeat I
and TM domain 1 of repeat II; and motifs 4-6 span the cytoplasmic region 
between TM domain 6 of repeat II and TM domain 1 of repeat III. A single
iteration on SPTR40_18f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
