GAT3TRNSPORT
Neurotransmitter transport systems are integral to the release, re-uptake
and recycling of neurotransmitters at synapses. High affinity tranport
proteins found in the plasma membrane of presynaptic nerve terminals and
glial cells are responsible for the removal from the extracellular space
of released-transmitters, thereby terminating their actions [1]. Plasma
membrane neurotransmitter transporters fall into two structurally and
mechanistically distinct families. The majority of the transporters
constitute an extensive family of homologous proteins that derive energy
from the co-transport of Na+ and Cl-, in order to transport neurotransmitter
molecules into the cell against their concentration gradient. The family 
has a common structure of 12 presumed transmembrane helices and includes
carriers for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrenaline/adrenaline,
dopamine, serotonin, proline, glycine, choline, betaine and taurine. They 
are structurally distinct from the second more-restricted family of plasma
membrane transporters, which are responsible for excitatory amino acid 
tranport. The latter couple glutamate and aspartate uptake to the co-
transport of Na+ and the counter-transport of K+, with no apparent
dependence on Cl- [2]. In addition, both of these transporter families
are distinct from the vesicular neurotransmitter transporters [3,4].

Sequence analysis of the Na+/Cl- neurotransmitter superfamily reveals that
it can be divided into four subfamilies, these being transporters for
monoamines, the amino acids proline and glycine, GABA, and a group of
orphan transporters [5].

GABA is the major inhibitory transmitter in the mammalian brain, and is
widely distributed throughout the nervous system. Molecular cloning
studies have resulted in the cloning of three Na+ and Cl- -coupled GABA
transporters (known as GAT-1, GAT-2, GAT-3) and a betaine/GABA transporter
(BGT-1). Each transporter shows varying affinities for GABA, different
substrate and blocker pharmacologies, and different tissue localisation [6].

Brain regions containing GAT-3 mRNA transcripts include the retina,
olfactory bulb, subfornical organ, hypothalamus, midline thalamus and
brainstem. GAT-3 mRNA was found to be absent from the neocortex and 
cerebellar cortex, and very weak in the hippocampus [6]. Furthermore,
immunocytological studies have demonstrated that this transporter may be
localised solely to glial (non-neuronal) cells, suggesting that glial GABA
uptake may function to limit the spread of GABA from the synapse, as well
as to regulate overall GABA levels.

GAT3TRNSPORT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
GAT-3 GABA neurotransmitter transporter. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the GAT-3 GABA transporter but distinguish it
from others - motif 1 resides within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus;
motif 2 encodes a portion of the large putative cytoplasmic loop; and motif
3 lies on the putative cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single iteration on
SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.
