PHPHTRNFRASE
The phosphoenolpyruvate phosphotransferase (PEP-PTS) system of bacteria 
facilitates the utilisation of a number of small molecules via a complex 
two-component sensing and regulatory phosphate transfer system [1]. The 
system transports these moieties through the cell membrane and tightly 
couples transport with phosphoryl transfer from the PEP to the molecule
via several phosphoprotein intermediates [1]. Sugars are usually the 
molecules transferred, although translocation of proteins and nitrogen has
also been implicated [1]. 

The first step in the process is catalysed by PTS Enzyme 1, a protein with 
two functional domains [2]. Enzyme 1 dimerisation is required in order for  
autophosphorylation by PEP in the presence of MgCl2. While the N-terminal 
domain of Enzyme 1 matches the nitrogen-sensitive domain of some plant 
pathogens, the C-terminal domain is similar to other Enzyme 1 and phosphate
dikinase genes from some Archaea microbes [2]. Research suggests that the
protein serves a sensory function, joining carbon and nitrogen metabolism 
together in prokaryotic cells [2].

More recently, an in vitro/vivo study has demonstrated that the Legionella 
pneumophila Enzyme 1 ortholog (termed PtsP) is essential for its virulence 
[3]. Mutational studies conferred an avirulent state on pathogenic strains,
and comparison of the full PtsP ORF to P.aeruginosa Enzyme 1 confirmed that 
the protein was required for successful host infection [3]. The structure of
the N-terminal domain of Escherichia coli PEP-PTS Enzyme 1 has been resolved
to 2.5A using X-ray crystallography [4]. It contains two distinct subdomains,
one of which contains four alpha-helices, the other consisting of a beta-
sandwich. This domain is topologically similar to the pyruvate phosphate
dikinase enzyme of several other pathogenic bacteria [4].

PHPHTRNFRASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase family. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment.
Three iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 72 sequences was identified. Numerous partial 
matches were also found, all of which are bacterial PTS system proteins that
fail to match one or more motifs.
