KV11CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].
    
Structurally, Kv channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-
gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and
3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+
channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif
that resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane spanning helices, and
forms the K+-selective pore domain [1-2].
   
The Kv family can be divided into 4 subfamilies on the basis of sequence
similarity and function: Shaker (Kv1), Shab (Kv2), Shaw (Kv3) and Shal 
(Kv4). All consist of pore-forming alpha subunits that associate with 
different types of beta subunit. To form a functional K+ channel pore,
4 alpha subunits and 4 beta subunits are required. The alpha subunits
have 6 well-conserved TM domains, a pore loop region and variable length
N- and C-termini. TM domains 5 and 6, and the loop region, form the K+ 
channel pore through which the K+ ions pass [3].  
   
The first Shaker (Kv1) sequence was found in Drosophila. Several vertebrate
K+ channels with similar amino acid sequences were subsequently found and,
together with the Drosophila Shaker channel, now constitute the Shaker (Kv1) 
family. These channels are mostly expressed in the brain, but can also be
found in non-excitable cells, such as lymphocytes [4,5].  

The Kv1.1 subfamily is expressed in the embryonic nervous system, brain and
lymphoid thymocyte precursors [5]. The kv1.1 subunits can associate with
Kv1.2 and Kv1.4 subunits, especially in the cerebellum. Point mutations in
Kv1.1 result in the disruption of this association and episodic ataxia type
I, a rare autosomal dominant neurological disorder characterised by brief
episodes of ataxia [6].

KV11CHANNEL is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kv1.1 voltage-gated K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the loop 
between putative TM domains 1 and 2; motif 2 spans the loop between TM 
domains 3 and 4; and motifs 3-5 lie at the C-terminus. A single iteration
on SPTR39_15f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set. Several partial matches were also found,
all of which are members of the Shaker family that fail to make significant
matches with one or more motifs.
