RIBOSOMALS12
Ribosomes are ribonucleoprotein particles that are the site of protein
synthesis. The structure of the ribosome is well conserved across the
prokaryotic and eukaryotic lineages, reflecting the early origin of their
essential function. They comprise two subunits, which can dissociate on 
heating. In prokaryotes, the small subunit contains a single large RNA 
moeity denoted, according to its sedimentation coefficient, 16S rRNA, and 21 
different ribosomal proteins, designated S1-S21. Eukaryotic small ribosomal
subunits contain 33 proteins, many of which are similar to those found
in prokaryotes. 

There are two major tRNA binding sites on the ribosome, termed the A site, 
where incoming aminoacyl-tRNA is bound, and the P site (for peptidyl tRNA), 
where new peptide bonds are formed. The ribosomal proteins catalyse ribosome 
assembly and stabilise the rRNA, tuning the structure of the ribosome for 
optimal function [1]. Evidence suggests that, in prokaryotes, the peptidyl
transferase reaction is performed by the large subunit 23S rRNA, whereas
proteins probably have a greater role in eukaryotic ribosomes. Most of the
proteins lie close to, or on the surface of, the 30S subunit, arranged
peripherally around the rRNA [2]. The small subunit ribosomal proteins can
be categorised as primary binding proteins, which bind directly and
independently to 16S rRNA; secondary binding proteins, which display no
specific affinity for 16S rRNA, but its assembly is contingent upon the
presence of one or more primary binding proteins; and tertiary binding
proteins, which require the presence of one or more secondary binding
proteins and sometimes other tertiary binding proteins.

The small ribosomal subunit protein S12 contains 130-150 amino acids. In 
E.coli, S12 is known to be involved in the translation initiation step.
S12 belongs to a family of ribosomal proteins [3] that includes: eubacterial
S12; archaebacterial S12; algal and plant chloroplast S12; cyanelle S12;
protozoa and plant mitochondrial S12; yeast S28; Drosophila mitochondrial
protein tko (Technical KnockOut); and mammalian S23.

RIBOSOMALS12 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
ribosomal S12 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 2 includes the central
region encoded by PROSITE pattern RIBOSOMAL_S12 (PS00055). Two iterations 
on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 78 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also 
found, all of which are homologues that fail to make significant matches
with one or more motifs, and many of which are fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 72 sequences, and 5
partial matches.
