OREXINR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

The hypothalamus plays a central role in the integrated control of feeding
and energy homeostasis [6]. A new family of neuropeptides, orexins, have
been identified that bind and activate two closely related (previously) 
orphan GPCRs [6,7]. Orexins stimulate appetite and food consumption [7].
Their genes are expressed bilaterally and symmetrically in the lateral
hypothalamus, which has been shown to be the "feeding centre". By contrast,
the "satiety centre" is expressed in the ventromedial hypothalamus and is
dominated by the leptin-regulated neuropeptide network. 

OREXINR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for orexin
receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4
sequences, focusing on those sections that characterise the orexin receptors
but distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like GPCR family - motifs
1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus; motif 3 spans the C-terminus of TM domain
2, leading into the first external loop; motif 4 lies in the second
cytoplasmic loop; motifs 5 and 6 span the second external loop; motifs 7 and
8 span the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 9 lies in the third external loop;
and motif 10 resides at the C-terminus. A single iteration on OWL31.1 was 
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set. A single partial match was found, an orexin receptor 
fragment that matches motifs 3 and 4.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences.
