APJRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

The human APJ gene was originally cloned in 1993 using a set of primers
based on the 7 conserved TM domains. The putative sequence is closest in
terms of identity (40-50% in the TM regions) to the angiotensin receptor
(AT1); however, angiotensin II shows no affinity for the receptor [6]. The
endogenous ligand has recently been isolated from bovine stomach and
characterised as a 77 amino acid peptide, which was named apelin [7]. The
mature transcript encodes a preproprotein that yields a 13 amino acid active
peptide from the C-terminal end. Apelin has a similar mRNA distribution to
angiotensin II and the active peptides share some similarity. In vivo
administration of apelin to rats results in acute hypotensive and thirst-
promoting effects [8].

APJRECEPTOR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for APJ
receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the APJ receptors but distinguish them from the related
angiotensin II receptors and the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily -
motifs 1 and 2 span the extracellular N-terminus; motif 3 lies in the second
external loop; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of the third external loop and 
the N-terminus of TM domain 7; and motifs 5-7 lie in the cytoplasmic
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39_14f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
