FUNRIBOTOXIN
Fungi are ubiquitous in nature, and numerous fungal diseases in humans, 
cattle, poultry, etc., have been described. The major pathogenic species
of Aspergillus for humans is Aspergillus fumigatus [1], which is responsible
for a variety of allergic and invasive diseases; the most severe form is
invasive aspergillosis, which is an increasingly important cause of
mortality in severely immunocompromised patients, especially those with
acute leukaemia. During human fungal infections, a variety of complex 
circulating antigens are found in the urine and serum of patients. Of these,
the major antigen is a 18kDa protein, whose amino acid composition is
similar to that of mitogillin and restrictocin [1].

The fungal ribotoxins are a family of highly specific ribonucleases that 
inactivate the ribosome by cleavage of the 23-28S RNA of the large ribosomal 
subunit at a single phosphodiester bond. Cleavage abolishes the capacity of
ribosomes to carry out protein synthesis by inhibiting elongation factor 1-
dependent binding of aminoacyl-tRNA and GTP-dependent binding of elongation
factor 2 to ribosomes. Mitogillin-like ribotoxins are among the most potent
inhibitors of translation so far identified, and they have been investigated
as potential anti-tumour agents, or components of immunotoxins [2].

Mitogillin and the related Aspergillus fungal ribotoxins, restrictocin (from 
which mitogillin differs by only one amino acid) and a-sarcin (with which it 
has 86% amino acid sequence identity), are small basic proteins of ~17kDa, 
consisting of a single polypeptide chain. These proteins share amino acid
sequence similarity with T1/U2-like ribonucleases, but their ability to
interact specifically with the ribosome and cause a single ribonucleolytic
cleavage in the large subunit rRNA is unique. Similarities and differences
in the amino acid sequences of ribotoxins and other guanyl/purine 
ribonucleases may represent domains or residues key to ribonucleolytic
activity and specificity [2,3]. The presence of such domains (some of 
which are similar to sequences in ribosome-associated proteins) in fungal 
ribotoxins, led to the hypothesis that fungal ribotoxins are a family of 
naturally engineered toxins with ribosomal targeting elements inserted 
into non-essential regions of T1-like ribonucleases. 

FUNRIBOTOXIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
major allergen fungal ribotoxins. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 includes beta-strand 1,
which bears the first active site His residue; motif 2 includes strand 2,
which houses the active site Asp; motif 3 encodes the N-terminus of strand
3, which bears the active site Arg; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of strand 3
and the N-terminal portion of strand 4; and motif 5 includes strand 5, which
houses the second active site His. Two iterations on SPTR39_17f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11
sequences was identified.
