EDG2RECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Lysophospholipids (LPs), such as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P) and sphingosylphosphorylcholine (SPC), have long been
known to act as signalling molecules in addition to their roles as
intermediates in membrane biosynthesis [6]. They have roles in the
regulation of cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis and development, and
have been implicated in a wide range of pathophysiological conditions,
including: blood clotting, corneal wounding, subarachinoid haemorrhage,
inflammation and colitis [7]. A number of G protein-coupled receptors bind
members of the lysophospholipid family - these include: the cannabinoid
receptors; platelet activating factor receptor; OGR1, an SPC receptor
identified in ovarian cancer cell lines; PSP24, an orphan receptor that has
been proposed to bind LPA; and at least 8 closely related receptors, the EDG
family, that bind LPA and S1P [6].

LPA is found in all cell types in small quantities (associated with membrane
biosynthesis) but is produced in significant quantities by some cellular
sources, accounting for the levels of LPA in serum. LPA is also found in
elevated levels in ovarian cancer ascites, and acts to stimulate
proliferation and promote survival of the cancer cells [8]. The effects of
LPA on the proliferation and morphology of a number of other cell types have
been well documented [6,8]. However, identification of the mechanisms by
which these effects are accomplished has been complicated by a number of
factors, such as: a lack of antagonists, difficulty in ligand-binding
experiments and the responsiveness of many cell types to LPA [8]. The
G protein-coupled receptors EDG-2, EDG-4 and EDG-7 have now been identified
as high affinity receptors for LPA. It has been suggested that these
receptors should now be referred to as lpA1, lpA2 and lpA3 respectively
[6,7].

EDG-2 was originally identified as a gene involved in neuron production from
embryonic cerebral cortex [6]. EDG-2 is widely distributed, with highest
levels in the brain (in which expression correlates with development of
oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells) [6]. In the periphery, EDG-2 is found in
many tissues, including the heart, kidney, testis, spleen and muscle in both
humans and mouse [8]. The receptor is also expressed in a number of cancers
[6]. Upon binding of LPA, EDG-2 couples to G proteins of the Gi, Gq and
G12/13 classes, to mediate a range of effects including: inhibition of
adenylyl cyclase; activation of phospholipase C, serum response element and
MAP kinases; and actomyosin stimulation. These processes lead to cell
rounding and proliferation [8].

EDG2RECEPTOR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
EDG-2 lysophosphatidic acid receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
areas of the alignment that characterise the EDG-2 receptors but distinguish
them from the rest of the LPA receptor family - motif 1 resides at the
N-terminus; motif 2 also encodes part of the N-terminus, leading into TM
domain 1; motif 3 lies in the first external loop; motif 4 spans the second
cytoplasmic loop; motif 5 resides in the second external loop; motif 6
encodes the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 7 lies at the C-terminus of TM
domain 7; and motifs 8 and 9 span the C-terminus. Two iterations on
SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 7 sequences was identified.
