TNFACTORR3
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 3 (also known as lymphotoxin-beta receptor) acts as a receptor
for the heterotrimer of lymphotoxin-alpha and beta, and also for the TNF 
ligand LIGHT. Activation of the receptor promotes apoptosis via recruitment
of TNFR-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) [7]. 

TNFACTORR3 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour 
necrosis factor receptor 3. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise TNF receptor 3 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor 
subtypes - motif 1 resides within the extracellular N-terminal region; 
motif 2 spans part of the transmembrane domain and part of the intracellular
C-terminal region; and motifs 3-5 lie within the intracellular C-terminal
region. Two iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified.
