FLGHOOKAP1
Within the bacterial flagellum, the basal-body rod, the hook, the hook-
associated proteins (HAPs), and the helical filament together constitute an 
axial substructure whose elements share structural features and a common
export pathway [1]. The amino acid sequences of the hook protein and of the 
three HAPs of Salmonella typhimurium have been deduced from the DNA 
sequences of their structural genes (flgE, flgK, flgL and fliD respectively)
[1]. These sequences have been compared with each other and with those for 
the filament protein (flagellin) and four rod proteins [1]. The hook protein
was found to be most similar to the distal rod protein (FlgG) and the
proximal HAP (HAP1), which are thought to be attached to the proximal and
distal ends of the hook, the similarities being most pronounced near the N-
and C-termini [1].

It is thought that the axial proteins may adopt amphipathic alpha-helical
conformations at their N- and C-termini. These regions of the filament and
hook are believed to be responsible for quaternary interactions between
subunits [1]. Interaction between N- and C-terminal alpha-helices may be
important in the formation of the axial structures of the flagellum [1].
Although consensus sequences have been noted, no consensus extends to the
entire set of axial proteins. Thus the basis for recognition of a protein
for export by the flagellum-specific pathway remains to be identified [1]. 

FLGHOOKAP1 is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
flagellar hook-associated protein 1. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the N-terminal
asparagine-rich domain encoded by PROSITE pattern FLAGELLA_BB_ROD (PS00588),
a region that characterises flagellar basal body rod proteins. A single
iteration on OWL30.2 was required to reach convergence, no further sequences
being identified beyond the starting set.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 2 sequences, and 5
partial matches.
