TNFACTORR11
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptors 11A and 11B mediate the effects of receptor activator for 
NF-kappa-B ligand (RANKL), an essential osteoclast regulatory factor. The 
receptors have opposing effects - activation of TNF receptor 11A by RANKL 
promotes osteoclast differentiation [7], while TNF receptor 11B acts as a 
soluble decoy receptor for the ligand, thus inhibiting differentiation [8].

TNFACTORR11 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour 
necrosis factor receptor 11 subtypes A and B. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions in the N-terminal two thirds of the alignment, focusing on
those sections that characterise TNF receptors 11A and B but distinguish
them from other TNF receptor subtypes. A single iteration on SPTR57_40f was 
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond
the starting set.
