DUFFYANTIGEN
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Chemokines are proteins that have important physiological and patho-
physiological roles in a wide range of acute and chronic inflammatory
processes [6]. Their sequences are similar and are characterised by a
4-cysteine motif: the family can be divided according to whether the first 2
Cys residues are adjacent (the C-C family), or separated by an intervening
residue (the C-x-C family).

The Duffy antigen/chemokine receptor was originally identified as a blood
group antigen on the surface of red blood cells (RBCs). It has been found 
to act as a multispecific receptor for chemokines of both the C-C and C-X-C
families, including: Il-8, MGSA, RANTES and MCP-1 [7]. While the receptor
is predicted to have 7 TM domains, it shares only very low levels of 
sequence similarity with the other chemokine receptors (indeed, the 
characteristic rhodopsin-like signature is virtually absent) - it is
considered to be most similar to the interleukin-8B receptors. 

Duffy is expressed on RBCs (in Duffy-positive individuals), endothelial
cells of postcapillary venules and Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. On 
RBCs, the Duffy antigen acts as a receptor for invasion by the malarial
parasite, Plasmodium vivax; Duffy-negative individuals, whose RBCs do not
express the receptor are resistant to such infection [7]. The normal
physiological function of Duffy remains unclear. It is believed to play a 
more important role on endothelial cells, since expression on these cell
types is highly conserved, whereas the function on RBCs appears to be 
dispensable in order to confer resistance to malaria. The signalling
pathways activated by Duffy are also unknown and the receptor has not 
been shown to act through a G protein [7].

DUFFYANTIGEN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Duffy antigen/chemokine receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - the motifs encode
each of the putative TM domains. Two iterations on SPTR39.22_17.3f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 7
sequences was identified. Note that no member of any GPCR superfamily 
matched, or partially matched, this 7TM signature.
