BCTLIPOCALIN
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration, and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Relatively recently, bacterial lipocalins have been described for the 
first time [5-7]. These are lipoproteins anchored to the outer membrane 
of Gram-negative bacteria such as E.coli. Their promoters are activated at 
the transition between exponential and stationary growth phases. Bacterial
lipocalin sequences are quite closely related to apolipoprotein D and may
serve a starvation response function in bacteria. Overexpression, membrane
fractionation, and metabolic labelling with tritiated palmitate showed 
bacterial lipocalins to be globomycin-sensitive outer membrane proteins.

The bacterial lipocalins have been found in a small number of species, 
raising the possibility that they originated by horizontal transfer. 
Estimates of the G+C content in the first and third codon positions of 
these genes have been calculated. A biased %G+C in the 1st and 3rd codon
positions would suggest horizontal transfer. None of the computed G+C 
contents of the bacterial lipocalin genes were outside of the expected 
limits (between the first and third quartiles). These data provide no 
support for a hypothesis in which bacterial lipocalins were recently 
acquired through horizontal transfer. Further evidence against horizontal 
transfer will come from finding more lipocalins in different species, 
thus making the gene transfer hypothesis more unlikely. 

BCTLIPOCALIN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
bacterial lipocalins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the bacterial lipocalins but distinguish them from the rest of
lipocalin superfamily - motif I includes the GxW triplet that forms part of
the first beta-strand (cf. LIPOCALIN signature motif 1 and  PROSITE pattern
LIPOCALIN (PS00213)); motif 5 corresponds closely with the second motif of
the LIPOCALIN signature, which encodes a TDY triplet that lies in a 
conserved region of the barrel involving the 6th and 7th beta-strands and
the loop between them; and motif 6 spans a similar region to the third
LIPOCALIN motif, which encodes an Arg (sometimes a Lys) residue, which lies
in a structurally conserved region involving the final strand and part of 
the loop linking it to the C-terminal alpha-helix. Two iterations on
SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 4 sequences was identified. 

An update on SPTR57.15_40.15f identified a true set of 182 sequences and
numerous partial matches, all of which are family members that fail to 
match one or more motifs.
