PROTEASEAR3
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Thrombin is a coagulation protease that activates platelets, leukocytes, 
endothelial and mesenchymal cells at sites of vascular injury, acting partly
through an unusual proteolytically activated GPCR [6]. Gene knockout 
experiments have provided definitive evidence for a second thrombin receptor
in mouse platelets and have suggested tissue-specific roles for different
thrombin receptors. Because the physiological agonist at the receptor was
originally unknown, it was provisionally named protease-activated receptor
(PAR) [7]. At least 4 PAR subtypes have now been characterised. Thus, the 
thrombin and PAR receptors constitute a fledgling receptor family that 
shares a novel proteolytic activation mechanism [8].

The human thrombin receptor, designated protease-activated receptor 3 (PAR3),
has been cloned and characterised [6]. PAR3 can mediate thrombin-triggered
phosphoinositide hydrolysis and is expressed in a variety of tissues, 
including human bone marrow and mouse megakaryocytes, making it a candidate
for the sought-after second platelet thrombin receptor [6]. PAR3 provides a
new tool for understanding thrombin signalling and a possible target for
therapeutics designed selectively to block thrombotic, inflammatory and
proliferative responses to thrombin [6].  

PROTEASEAR3 is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
protease activated receptor 3. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the PAR 3 receptor but distinguish it from closely related 
members of the PAR family - motifs 1-4 reside at the N-terminus; motif 5
spans the first cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM domain 2; motif 6 resides
in the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 7 and 8 span the second external loop;
motif 9 encodes part of the third cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM domain 6;
and motif 10 spans the third external loop. A single iteration on SPTR37_10f
was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified 
beyond the starting set.
