ANTISTASIN
Antistasin is a 15-kDa protein found in the salivary glands of the Mexican
leech, Haementeria officinalis; it is an anticoagulant that functions by
inhibiting factor Xa [1]. The protein contains 119 residues, with an 
unusually high cysteine content (20 residues in all), and exhibits a 2-fold
internal repeated structure. Four isoforms of antistasin have been
identified in leech salivary gland extracts; partial sequence analysis 
indicates that these isoforms differ only by 1 or 2 amino acid residues [1].

Ghilanten is an anticoagulant-antimetastatic protein of the haematophagous
leech, Haementeria ghilianii. Like antistasin, it contains 119 amino acids,
with 20 cysteines, and a heparin-binding consensus motif at its C-terminus.
Arginine-34 is the residue involved in the active-site inhibition of trypsin
and Factor Xa [2].

The 3D structure of antistasin has been determined to 1.9A resolution by
X-ray crystallography [3]. The structure reveals a novel protein fold
comprising two similar domains, which can be divided into two similarly 
sized subdomains, with different relative orientations. Thus, the domain
shapes differ, the N-terminal domain being wedge-shaped and the C-terminal
domain flat [3]. Docking studies suggest that it is differences in domain
shape that enable the N-terminal domain to bind and inhibit factor Xa,
rather than the C-terminal domain, despite very similar active sites [3]. A 
putative exosite binding region is evident in the N-terminal domain
(residues 15-17), which is likely to interact with a cluster of positively
charged residues on the factor Xa surface (Arg222/Lys223/Lys224), explaining
the specificity and inhibitory potency of antistasin towards factor Xa [3].

ANTISTASIN is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
antistasin family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
cysteine-rich domain - motif 1 includes alpha-helix 1; and motif 2 includes
beta-strand 1. Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified.
