INTRLEUKN1BP
Interleukin-1 alpha and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 alpha and IL-1 beta) are 
cytokines that participate in the regulation of immune responses, 
inflammatory reactions, and hematopoiesis [1]. Two types of IL-1 receptor, 
each with three extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains, limited
sequence similarity (28%) and different pharmacological characteristics
have been cloned from mouse and human cell lines: these have been termed 
type I and type II receptors [2]. The receptors both exist in transmembrane
(TM) and soluble forms: the soluble IL-1 receptor is thought to be post-
translationally derived from cleavage of the extracellular portion of the
membrane receptors [2].

Both IL-1 receptors appear to be well conserved in evolution, and map to the
same chromosomal location [3]. The receptors can both bind all three forms 
of IL-1 (IL-1 alpha, IL-1 beta and IL-1RA) [3].

The vaccinia virus genes B15R and B18R each encode proteins with N-terminal 
hydrophobic sequences, possible sites for attachment of N-linked 
carbohydrate and a short C-terminal hydrophobic domain [4]. These properties
are consistent with the mature proteins being either virion, cell surface
or secretory glycoproteins. Protein sequence comparisons reveal that
the gene products are related to each other (20% identity) and to the Ig
superfamily [4]. The highest degree of similarity is to the human and murine
interleukin-1 receptors, although both proteins are related to a wide range
of Ig superfamily members, including the interleukin-6 receptor [4]. A novel
method for virus immune evasion has been proposed in which the product of 
one or both of these proteins may bind interleukin-1 and/or interleukin-6,
preventing these cytokines reaching their natural receptors [4]. A similar
gene product from cowpox virus has also been shown to specifically bind
murine IL-1 beta [5]. 

INTRLEUKN1BP is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
interleukin-1 binding protein precursor. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on
those sections that characterise the interleukin-1 binding protein precursor
but distinguish it from other members of the interleukin-1 receptor family - 
motifs 2 and 3 span Ig-like C2-type domain 1; motifs 5 and 6 reside within 
Ig-like C2-type domain 2; and motifs 8-10 span Ig-like C2-type domain 3.
Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified. Several partial 
matches were also found, all of which are Variola virus proteins that match
motifs 3 and 4 and 8 and 9 with a high degree of similarity.
