C3ANPHYLTXNR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

An orphan GPCR with 37% nucleotide identity to the C5a receptor [6] has 
been identified [7]. By contrast with C5aR and other GPCRs, a novel feature
of the gene product is the presence of an unusually large predicted extra-
cellular loop, containing in excess of 160 amino acid residues, between
TM domains 4 and 5 [7]. In human tissues, expression of mRNA for this 
receptor is similar to, but distinct from C5aR expression [7]. Although
there are some differences, transcripts for both receptors are detected
in tissues throughout the body and the central nervous system [7]. This
novel gene has been shown to encode the human anaphylatoxin C3a receptor 
[7]. The C3aR appears to be widely expressed in different lymphoid tissues,
providing evidence for a central role of the C3a anaphylatoxin in 
inflammatory processes [8]. 

C3ANPHYLTXNR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
anaphylatoxin C3a receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved 
regions spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the C3a receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus;
motif 3 spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 spans the C-terminus of 
putative TM domain 2, leading into the first external loop; motifs 5 and 6
lie in the second external loop; motif 7 spans the third cytoplasmic loop;
motif 8 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 6, leading into the third external
loop; motif 9 spans the C-terminus of the third external loop and the
N-terminus of TM domain 7; and motif 10 resides at the C-terminus. Two
iterations on OWL31.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
