S17BPHPHTASE
Inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase (1PTASE) and inositol monophosphatase
(MPTASE) are enzymes of the inositol signalling pathway that share similar
enzymatic activity [1]. Both enzymes exhibit an absolute requirement for
metal ions (Mg2+ is preferred), and both are uncompetitively inhibited by
submillimolar concentrations of Li+. Their amino acid sequences contain
a number of conserved motifs, which are also shared by several other 
proteins related to MPTASE (including products of fungal QaX and qutG,
bacterial suhB and cysQ, and yeast hal2) [1]. 

Structural analysis of these proteins has revealed a common core of 155
residues: the core comprises 5 alpha-helices and 11 beta-strands, and
includes residues essential for metal binding and catalysis. While the
core has been conserved, presumably to impart catalytic function, the
loops and regions of structure outside the core have evolved unique
regulatory domains [1].

An interesting property of the enzymes of this family is their sensitivity
to Li+ at levels achieved in patients undergoing therapy for manic
depression. The targets and mechanism of action of Li+ are unknown, but
overactive inositol phosphate signalling may account for symptoms of the
disease [2,3]. It has been proposed that these Li+-sensitive proteins 
could represent targets for Li+ in manic depressive disease [1].   

The structures of several members of the superfamily have been determined
by X-ray crystallography [3-7]. The fold of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
(FBPTASE) was noted to be identical to that of MPTASE [7]. Sedoheptulose-
1,7-bisphosphate is involved in carbohydrate biosynthesis, catalysing the
production of sedoheptulose 7-phosphate and phosphate from sedoheptulose-
1,7-bisphosphate and water. The enyme shares a high degree of similarity
with fructose-1,6-bisphosphatases, but it does not contain the regulatory
motif present in the latter [8,9]
     
S17BPHPHTASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase family. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 24 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatases but
distinguish them from closely related members of the inositol mono-
phosphatase superfamily. Three iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to 
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 32 sequences was
identified. Numerous partial matches were also found, most of which are
fructose-1,6-bisphosphatases that match two or more motifs.
