AMPHIPHYSIN2
Amphiphysins are proteins that are thought to be involved in clathrin-
mediated endocytosis, actin function, and signalling pathways. They are
highly concentrated in nerve terminals, where they may act as linkers
between the clathrin coat and dynamin in the endocytosis of synaptic
vesicles. Such recycling of synaptic vesicles is necessary for
neurotransmission to continue, following neurotransmitter release.
Amphiphysin family members share a similar three-domain organisation: the
N-terminal domain contains six heptad repeats, which are predicted to form
a coiled-coiled structure, thought to be involved in the dimerisation of
amphiphysin molecules; the central region binds the heavy chain of clathrin
and the clathrin adaptor protein AP-2, through distinct sites; and the
C-terminal domain contains a Src-homology-3 (SH3) domain that binds the 
GTPase dynamin and the inositol-5'-phosphatase synaptojanin-1. The 
interactions mediated by both the central and C-terminal domains are
believed to be modulated by proten phosphorylation [1,2].

Amphiphysin 2 was the second amphiphysin family member found in mammals.
The gene encoding it has been found to be alternatively spliced. The
various products have been named: BIN-1, Sh3P9, BRAMP-2 and ALP-1. They
have different distribution patterns, with the largest form (~95 kDa) being
expressed solely in the brain, where it shares a very similar (if not
identical) distribution pattern to amphiphysin 1 [1].

AMPHIPHYSIN2 is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
amphiphysin isoform 2. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the amphiphysin isoform 2 but distinguish it from other
isoforms - motifs 1-2 lie near the N-terminus before the putative coiled-
coil domain; motif 3 encodes a portion of the coiled-coil domain; motifs
4-5 lie between the coiled-coil domain and the proline-rich region; motif 6
encodes the start of the proline rich region; motif 7 occurs immediately
prior to the SH3 domain; and motif 8 encodes ~ 1/5 of the SH3 domain. Two
iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified.
