KCNE3CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].

Some types of K+ channel are closed at the resting potential of the cell,
but open on membrane depolarisation, and are thus known as voltage-gated 
channels. Each of these types of channel typically comprises 4 pore-forming
alpha subunits that may associate with one of a number of different types of
beta subunit. Two types of beta subunit (KCNE and KCNAB) are presently known
to associate with voltage-gated alpha subunits (Kv, KCNQ and eag-like).
However, not all combinations of alpha and beta subunits are possible.

The KCNE family of K+ channel subunits are membrane glycoproteins that 
possess a single transmembrane (TM) domain. They share no structural 
relationship with the alpha subunit proteins, which possess pore forming 
domains. The subunits appear to have a regulatory function, modulating the 
kinetics and voltage dependence of the alpha subunits of voltage-dependent
K+ channels [2]. KCNE subunits are formed from short polypeptides of ~130 
amino acids, and are divided into five subfamilies: KCNE1 (MinK/IsK),
KCNE2 (MiRP1), KCNE3 (MiRP2), KCNE4 (MiRP3) and KCNE1L (AMMECR2).

KCNE3 is known to associate with the pore forming subunits KCNQ1, KCNQ4,
HERG and Kv3.4. KCNE3 forms complexes with Kv3.4 in skeletal muscle -
KCNE3 mutations have been identified in families with skeletal muscle
disorders [3]. In the intestine, KCNE3 associates with KCNQ1 to form
channels that are stimulated by cAMP and are thought to be involved in
secretory diarrhoea and cystic fibrosis [4].

KCNE3CHANNEL is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
KCNE voltage-gated K+ channel subfamily E3. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment, focusing
on those sections that characterise the KCNE3 subunits but distinguish them 
from the rest of the KCNE family - motifs 1-3 lie in the extracellular 
N-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
