VACCYTOTOXIN
Helicobacter pylori is a micro-aerophilic bacterium with the extraordinary 
ability to establish infections in human stomachs that can last for years or 
decades, despite immune and inflammatory responses and normal turnover of 
the gastric epithelium and overlying mucin layer in which it resides. It is 
carried by more than half of all people worldwide and has attracted great 
attention as a major cause of peptic ulcer diseases and an early risk factor 
for gastric cancer - one of the most lethal malignancies worldwide. It is 
one of the most genetically diverse of bacterial species and its great 
diversity implies a striking lack of selection for just one or a few 
genotypes that might be best adapted for all humans [1,2].

Most H.pylori strains secrete a toxin (VacA) that induces multiple 
structural and functional alterations in eukaryotic cells. The most 
prominent effect of VacA is its capacity to induce the formation of large 
cytoplasmic vacuoles in eukaryotic cells. In addition, VacA interferes with 
the process of antigen presentation, increases permeability of polarised 
epithelial cell monolayers, and forms anion-selective membrane channels. 
Formation of channels in endosomal membranes of cells may be an important 
feature of the mechanism by which VacA induces cell vacuolation. H.pylori 
vacA encodes a ~139kDa protoxin, which undergoes cleavage of a 33-residue 
N-terminal signal sequence and C-terminal proteolytic processing to 
yield a mature secreted toxin. Purified VacA degrades during prolonged 
storage into two fragments (of ~34 and 58kDa), which are derived from the
N- and the C-terminus of the toxin respectively. The mass of the
experimentally intact toxin (~88.2kDa) corresponds closely to the sum of 
the masses of the two proteolytic fragments [3].

Secondary structure predictions suggest that a 35kDa portion of the VacA 
C-terminal domain is rich in amphipathic beta-sheets, and this region 
exhibits low-level similarity to members of the family of autotransporter 
proteins. In addition, at the C-terminus of VacA, there is a phenylalanine-
containing motif that is commonly found in autotransporter proteins, as well
as in numerous Gram-negative bacterial outer membrane proteins. An intact 
N-terminal portion of VacA is not required for proteolytic processing of the
protoxin. However, the N-terminal 32 amino acids of the mature VacA are 
predicted to form the only contiguous hydrophobic region in the protein that
is long enough to span the membrane. What is more, isogenic H.pylori mutant
strains in which the C-terminal VacA domain is disrupted, fail to express or
secrete any detectable VacA, which is probably attributable to the 
degradation of export-incompetent toxin precursors within the periplasm. It 
is speculated that the VacA protoxin may undergo proteolytic cleavage at
multiple sites downstream from amino acid 854 of the protoxin, which would
yield a 33kDa cell-associated domain, as well as a fragment of ~15kDa [3].

The colonisation of the stomach by this microorganism requires complex 
adaptation processes. Among them, a key feature is acid tolerance, allowing 
the bacterium to cross the stomach lumen (pH 1-2) and to survive within the 
mucous layer covering the gastric epithelium (pH range, 1-2 to 6). The 
purified VacA cytotoxin exhibits minimal activity unless it is first exposed 
to acidic or alkaline conditions prior to being added to eukaryotic cells. 
The acidic pH activation of VacA is necessary for formation of membrane 
channels and for efficient internalisation by HeLa cells, and it is 
associated with changes in VacA protein structure. At neutral pH, purified 
VacA appears as a complex oligomeric structure; acidification to pH 3 or 
alkalisation to pH 10 results in the nearly complete disassembly of VacA 
oligomers into component monomers, which can reanneal into oligomers upon 
neutralisation. Although VacA forms anion-selective channels in model and 
cell membranes, the in vivo relevance of these phenomena for H.pylori 
gastric infection and alteration is still undefined [3,4].

VACCYTOTOXIN is a 15-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
H.pylori vacuolating cytotoxins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
largely spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment. Two iterations on
SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 37 sequences was identified. Four partial matches were also 
found, all of which are related H.pylori proteins that match 2 or 3 motifs.
