APOPREGBCLW
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death (PCD), is a common and evolutionarily 
conserved property of all metazoans [1]. In many biological processes, 
apoptosis is required to eliminate supernumerary or dangerous (e.g., pre-
cancerous) cells and to promote normal development. Thus, dysregulation  
of apoptosis can contribute to the development of many major diseases, 
including cancer, autoimmunity and neurodegenerative disorders. In most
cases, proteins of the caspase family execute the genetic programme that
leads to cell death. Bcl-2 proteins are central regulators of caspase
activation, and play a key role in cell death by regulating the integrity
of the mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes [2]. At 
least 20 Bcl-2 proteins have been reported in mammals, and several
others have been identified in viruses.

Bcl-2 family proteins fall roughly into three subtypes, which either promote 
cell survival (anti-apoptotic) or trigger cell death (pro-apoptotic). All 
members contain at least one of four conserved motifs, termed Bcl-2 Homology
(BH) domains. Bcl-2 subfamily proteins, which contain at least BH1 and BH2,
promote cell survival by inhibiting the adapters needed for the activation
of caspases. Pro-apoptotic members potentially exert their effects by dis-
placing the adapters from the pro-survival proteins; these proteins belong
either to the Bax subfamily, which contain BH1-BH3, or to the BH3 subfamily,
which mostly only feature BH3 [3]. Thus, the balance between antagonistic
family members is believed to play a role in determining cell fate.

Members of the wider Bcl-2 family, which also includes Bcl-x, Bcl-w and 
Mcl-1, are described by their similarity to Bcl-2 protein, a member of
the pro-survival Bcl-2 subfamily [3]. The C-terminal transmembrane domain
of Bcl-w targets the protein to the outer mitochondrial membrane, the ER
and the nuclear envelope. In healthy cells, Bcl-w resides in the cytoplasm,
and becomes membrane-associated in response to cytotoxic insults. Its 3D 
structure comprises a bundle of five amphipathic alpha-helices surrounding
two central hydrophobic helical regions. A hydrophobic groove, formed by
residues from BH1-BH3, is capable of binding the BH3 alpha-helix from a
pro-apoptotic BH3-only family member [4].

APOPREGBCLW is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for Bcl-W 
apoptosis regulator protein. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise Bcl-W proteins but distinguish them from closely-related 
Bcl-2 family members - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus, and includes part of 
BH4; motif 2 spans the C-terminal portion of BH4; motifs 3 and 4 are located 
between BH4 and BH1; and motif 5 spans the N-terminal portion of BH2. Two
iterations on SPTR40_22f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified.
