SULFNYLUR1
The sulphonylurea receptor (SUR) is a member of the ATP-binding cassette
superfamily that associates with certain K+ channel inward rectifier
subunits to form ATP-sensitive K+ channels (KATP channels) [1,2].  These are
a family of K+ channels that are inhibited by intracellular ATP, which can
couple metabolic state to cell excitability. Their presence on pancreatic
islet beta cells allows the cells to function as metabolic sensors,
regulating insulin release in relation to glucose metabolism. Furthermore,
SUR is the site of action for the sulphonylurea oral hypoglycaemic agents 
that are used widely for the treatment of non-insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus. When these agents bind to the sulphonlyurea receptor, they reduce
KATP channel activity, stimulating insulin release.

As mentioned, SUR is a member of the ATP-binding cassette superfamily
(traffic adenosine triphsophatase superfamily), other members including the
P-glycoprotein multi-drug resistance (MDR) proteins and the cystic
fibrosis transconductance regulators (CFTRs). This raises the possibility
that SUR may transport some endogenous substance, as yet unidentified.
Two closely related genes have been found to encode the sulphonylurea
receptors, SUR1 and SUR2, there being three splice variants of the second
form [3]. They are thought to contain 13-17 transmembrane (TM) domains,
with two potential nucleotide binding folds, and a large number of possible
protein kinase A, or C phosphorylation sites. 

SUR1 is thought to be the sulphonylurea receptor isoform that is a 
constituent of the pancreatic beta cell KATP channel. Several mutations
have been characterised in the human SUR1 gene, some of which are thought
to be responsible for the rare inheritable metabolic disorder, familial 
persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy, which is characterised
by excessive unregulated insulin secretion. SUR1 gene mutations may also
underlie the varying sensitivity of some individuals to sulphonylurea
oral hypoglycaemic agents [4]. 

SULFNYLUR1 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 1
sulphonylurea receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from the first two thirds
of the alignment, focusing on those regions that distingush type 1
sulphonlyurea receptors from type 2 - motif 1 resides within the N-terminal
putative extracellular domain; motif 2 lies in the third extracellular loop;
motifs 3-4 span the fifth cytoplasmic loop (which contains the first
putative nucleotode-binding domain); and motif 5 lies within the sixth 
extracellular domain. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9 sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 7 sequences.
