FMOXYGENASE5
Flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) constitute a family of xenobiotic-
metabolising enzymes [1]. Using an NADPH cofactor and FAD prosthetic group,
these microsomal proteins catalyse the oxygenation of nucleophilic nitrogen,
sulphur, phosphorous and selenium atoms in a range of structurally diverse
compounds. FMOs have been implicated in the metabolism of a number of
pharmaceuticals, pesticides and toxicants. In man, lack of hepatic FMO-
catalysed trimethylamine metabolism results in trimethylaminuria (fish 
odour syndrome).

Five mammalian forms of FMO are now known and have been designated
FMO1-FMO5 [2-6]: this is a recent nomenclature based on comparison of
amino acid sequences, and has been introduced in an attempt to eliminate
confusion inherent in multiple, laboratory-specific designations and
tissue-based classifications [1]. Following the determination of the
complete nucleotide sequence of S.cerevisiae [7], a novel gene was found
to encode a protein with similarity to mammalian monooygenases.

The deduced amino acid sequence of human FM05 includes the putative FAD- 
(GxGxxG) and NADP+ pyrophosphate-binding (GxGxxA) sites characteristic of 
mammalian FMOs [8], a 'FATGY' motif that has also been observed in a range
of siderphore biosynthetic enzymes [9], and a C-terminal hydrophobic segment
that is believed to anchor the monooxygenase to the microsomal membrane [10].

Human and guinea pig FMO5, like other FMOs, are encoded by multiple
transcripts. FMO5 has been identified in livers of adult humans, rabbits
and guinea pigs, and foetal livers of humans [11]. Neither the human nor 
guinea pig enzyme effectively catalyse the metabolism of methimazole, a
general FMO substrate; however, both are active with n-octylamine [11]. The
responses to detergent, ions and elevated temperature are all similar to 
those observed in rabbit FMO5, suggesting that these properties are species-
independent and that this form of FMO is not readily classified as a drug-
metabolising enzyme [11]. 

FMOXYGENASE5 is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type
5 flavin-containing monooxygenases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise type 5 FMOs but distinguish them from the rest
of the FMO family - motif 9 spans the C-terminal hydrophobic region thought
to act as a membrane anchor. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting
set. 
