GLFROXRDTASE
Glucose-fructose oxidoreductase (GFOR) catalyses the formation of D- 
gluconolactone and D-glucitol from D-glucose and D-fructose [1,2]. It has
one tightly-bound NADP(H) per enzyme subunit, it exists as a homotetramer, 
and is one of the pivotal proteins in the sorbitol-gluconate pathway. It is 
targeted to the periplasm of the Gram-negative cell envelope, and belongs to 
the GFO/IDH/MOCA superfamily [1,2]. First discovered in Zymomonas mobilis 
[1,2], homologues have also been found in Caulobacter crescentus and 
Deinococcus radiodurans. 
 
GFOR is of great interest as its mechanism of secretion into the bacterial 
periplasm differs from other precursor proteins of the Twin Arginine 
Translocation (TAT) pathway [3]. Although it exhibits the consensus TAT 
signal motif (S/T-R-R-x-L-F-K) at its N-terminus, unlike other TAT proteins 
that can be universally secreted across a number of Gram-negative microbes, 
GFOR is only translocated in Z.mobilis [3]. However, replacing the Z.mobilis
signal peptide with one from E.coli restores this function. This observation
has led to the suggestion that TAT-dependent precursors are optimally 
adapted only to their particular cognate secretion apparatus [3]. 

Recently, the crystal structure of Z.mobilis GFOR was resolved to 2.5A by 
means of X-ray crystallography [4]. This revealed that the protein indeed 
exists as a homotetramer, and has 4 active sites. There are 2 distinct 
domains: a classical dinucleotide binding fold at the N-terminus and a 9-
stranded beta-sheet at the C-terminus. NADP(H) is bound to the N-terminus of
the first alpha-helix [4]. 

GLFROXRDTASE is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
bacterial glucose-fructose oxidoreductases. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 spans 
beta-strand 1 and the N-terminus of alpha-helix 2; motif 2 encompasses 
strand 3 and helix 7; motif 3 spans the C-terminus of helix 10, strand 6, 
and helix 11; motif 4 encodes helix 8 and the N-terminus of strand 8; motif 
5 spans the C-terminus of strand 11 and strand 12; and motif 6 encodes the 
N-terminus of helix 10. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to 
reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting
set. Two partial matches were found: Q8XQZ2, a Ralstonia solanacearum 
glucose-fructose oxidoreductase that matches motifs 3 and 6; and Q927C7, a 
Listeria innocua peptidoglycan-anchored protein that matches motifs 2 and 5.
