DENSEGRNULE2
Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular apicomplexan protozoan 
parasite, with a complex lifestyle involving varied hosts [1]. It has two 
phases of growth: an intestinal phase in feline hosts, and an extra-
intestinal phase in other mammals. Oocysts from infected cats develop 
into tachyzoites, and eventually, bradyzoites and zoitocysts in the 
extraintestinal host [1]. Transmission of the parasite occurs through 
contact with infected cats or raw/undercooked meat; in immunocompromised 
individuals, it can cause severe and often lethal toxoplasmosis. Acute 
infection in healthy humans can sometimes also cause tissue damage [1].

The protozoan utilises a variety of secretory and antigenic proteins to 
invade a host and gain access to the intracellular environment [2]. These 
originate from distinct organelles in the T.gondii cell termed micronemes,  
rhoptries, and dense granules. They are released at specific times during 
invasion to ensure the proteins are allocated to their correct target 
destinations [2]. 

Dense granule antigens (GRAs) are released from the T.gondii tachyzoite
while still encapsulated in a host vacuole. Gra2, one of these moieties, is
rapidly targeted to a network of membranous tubules that connect with the
vacuolar membrane [3]. A recent study into the exact mechanism of Gra2
secretion has revealed that the secondary structure of the protein plays a
major role in its targeting and release from the apical pole of the 
parasitic cell [4]. Two amphipathic alpha-helical regions ensure not only
that association of Gra2 with the host vacuole membrane takes place, but 
also that it is correctly targeted to the cell posterior, where stabilising
networks of tubules form and hold the cell steady in the vacuole [4].

DENSEGRNULE2 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
dense granule Gra2 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length. A single iteration on 
SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being 
identified beyond the starting set. 
