MTABOTROPC8R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The metabotropic glutamate receptors are functionally and pharmacologically
distinct from the ionotropic glutamate receptors. They are coupled to G-
proteins and stimulate the inositol phosphate/Ca2+ intracellular signalling 
pathway [2-5]. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain 2 domains:
a large extracellular domain, and a membrane-associated domain that contains
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 regions, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
and receptors of the rhodopsin-type family: the metabotropic glutamate
receptors thus bear their own distinctive '7TM' signature. This 7TM
signature is also shared by the calcium-sensing receptors.

At least eight sub-types of metabotropic receptor (MGR1-8) have been 
identified in cloning studies. The sub-types differ in their agonist 
pharmacology and signal transduction pathways [6]. MGR8 has a strong 
expression in olfactory bulb, pontine gray, lateral reticular nucleus of
the thalamus, and piriform cortex; less abundant expression has been
detected in cerebral cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, mammillary body and
retina [7,8]. Glutamate evokes pertussis toxin-sensitive potassium currents
in Xenopus laevis oocytes co-expressing MGR8 and G protein-coupled inwardly
rectifying potassium channels [8]. The pharmacology and expression of MGR8
in mitral/tufted cells suggest it could be a presynaptic receptor modulating
glutamate release by these cells at their axon terminals in the entorhinal
cortex [7].

MTABOTROPC8R is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
metabotropic glutamate receptor 6 precursor. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short
conserved regions spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the metabotropic glutamate type 8 receptors but 
distinguish them from the rest of the metabotropic glutamate receptor family
- motifs 1-5 reside in the N-terminal extracellular domain; and motif 6 lies
in the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. A single iteration on OWL31.1 was 
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond 
the starting set. A single partial match was found, HSAC000099, a fragment 
that matches motifs 1 and 2.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 3 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
