PQVDCCALPHA1
Calcium channel proteins are involved in the control of neurotransmitter
release from neurons [1], and play an important role in the regulation of a
variety of cellular functions, including membrane excitability, muscle
contraction and synaptic transmission [2]. Voltage-gated calcium channels
are classified as T, L, N, P, Q and R, and are distinguished by their
sensitivity to pharmacological blocks, single-channel conductance kinetics,
and voltage-dependence. On the basis of their voltage activation
properties, the voltage-gated calcium classes can be further divided into
two broad groups: the low (T-type) and high (L, N, P, Q and R-type)
threshold-activated channels [3].

Generally, the channel proteins are composed of 4 tightly-coupled subunits
(alpha-1, alpha-2, beta and gamma), the alpha-1 subunit from each creating
the pore for the import of extracellular calcium ions. The alpha-1 subunit
shares sequence characteristics with all voltage-dependent cation channels,
and exploits the same 6-helix bundle structural motif - in both sodium and
calcium channels, this motif is repeated 4 times within the sequence to give
a 24-helix bundle. Within each of these repeats, 5 of the transmembrane (TM)
segments (S1, S2, S3, S5, S6) are hydrophobic and one is positively charged
(S4) - the latter is characterised by charged amino acids at very third
position, and probably represents the voltage-sensor.

Several genes encoding alpha-1 subunits have been identified, each forming
a distinct electrophysiological channel [4]. P- and Q-type channels are 
formed from alpha-1A subunits and function in transmitter release [5].
P-type channels are prevalent in cerebellar Purkinje cells, but are also 
expressed in many central and peripheral neurons, such as the spinal cord 
and visual cortex. By contrast, Q-type channels are found in cerebellar 
granule neurones and the hippocampus. Different mutations in the alpha-1A
subunit produce 3 human diseases: (1) episodic ataxia type-2; (2) familial
hemiplegic migraine; and (3) spinocerebellar ataxia type-6. All 3 diseases
result in cerebellar atrophy, but they differ in the extent and rate of 
progression of neuronal degeneration [3].

PQVDCCALPHA1 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
P/Q-type voltage-dependent calcium channel alpha-1 subunits. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the central portion of the alignment: motifs
1-4 lie in the cytoplasmic region between repeats I and II; and motif 5
encodes part of the extracellular region between TM domains 5 and 6 of
repeat IV. Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified.
