ANNEXINXI
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster, Xenopus
laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and Neurospora 
crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from those found in
other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium binding sites are found within
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as 
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity,
exocytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the
extracellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA
replication [2].

The annexin XI subtype was first reported in 1992 from a bovine cDNA
library [5]. The full-length cDNA encoded a polypeptide of 503 amino acids 
and was found to be widely expressed in a variety of bovine cell types. The
human orthologue was found to be identical to the 56K autoantigen, found in
individuals with a range of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis [6].

ANNEXINXI is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type XI annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an intitial alignment
of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that 
characterise type XI annexins but distinguish them from other closely 
related annexin subtypes - motifs 1-5 lie within the N-terminal portion
preceding the putative core repeats. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 
sequences was identified.
