KV12CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].
    
Structurally, Kv channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-
gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and
3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+
channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif
that resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane spanning helices, and
forms the K+-selective pore domain [1-2].
   
The Kv family can be divided into 4 subfamilies on the basis of sequence
similarity and function: Shaker (Kv1), Shab (Kv2), Shaw (Kv3) and Shal 
(Kv4). All consist of pore-forming alpha subunits that associate with 
different types of beta subunit. To form a functional K+ channel pore,
4 alpha subunits and 4 beta subunits are required. The alpha subunits
have 6 well-conserved TM domains, a pore loop region and variable length
N- and C-termini. TM domains 5 and 6, and the loop region, form the K+ 
channel pore through which the K+ ions pass [3].  
   
The first Shaker (Kv1) sequence was found in Drosophila. Several vertebrate
K+ channels with similar amino acid sequences were subsequently found and,
together with the Drosophila Shaker channel, now constitute the Shaker (Kv1) 
family. These channels are mostly expressed in the brain, but can also be
found in non-excitable cells, such as lymphocytes [4,5]. 

Kv1.2 channels are uniformly distributed in the heart and brain [5]. They
play diverse functional roles in several neuronal compartments, especially
in the regulation of pre- and post-synaptic membrane excitability [5]. 
Kv1.2 subunits can co-localise with other kv1 subunits. For example, Kv1.2
colocalises with Kv1.1 in the nodes of Ranvier in myelinated axons, and in
the brain, in particular, the axons and nerve terminals; Kv1.2 coassembles
with Kv1.4 subunits. In addition, Kv1.2 assembles with the Kv-beta2 subunit
resulting in the promotion of Kv1.2 transport to the cell surface [5].

KV12CHANNEL is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the Kv
1.2 voltage-gated K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motifs 1 and 2 span the loop
region between TM domains 1 and 2; motif 3 lies in the loop region between
TM domains 3 and 4; and motifs 4 and 5 reside at the C-terminus. Two
iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified. A single partial match was
also found, Q9I830, a family member from Rainbow trout that fails to make
significant matches with motifs 1 and 4. 
