PROXISOMPAGR
Steroid or nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) constitute an important super-
family of transcription regulators that are involved in widely diverse 
physiological functions, including control of embryonic development, cell
differentiation and homeostasis [1]. Members of the superfamily include the
steroid hormone receptors and receptors for thyroid hormone, retinoids, 
1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3 and a variety of other ligands. The proteins 
function as dimeric molecules in nuclei to regulate the transcription of 
target genes in a ligand-responsive manner [2,3]. In addition to C-terminal
ligand-binding domains, these nuclear receptors contain a highly-conserved,
N-terminal zinc-finger that mediates specific binding to target DNA 
sequences, termed ligand-responsive elements. In the absence of ligand,
steroid hormone receptors are thought to be weakly associated with nuclear
components; hormone binding greatly increases receptor affinity.

NRs are extremely important in medical research, a large number of them
being implicated in diseases such as cancer, diabetes, hormone resistance
syndromes, etc. [1]. While several NRs act as ligand-inducible transcription
factors, many do not yet have a defined ligand and are accordingly termed 
"orphan" receptors. During the last decade, more than 300 NRs have been
described, many of which are orphans, which cannot easily be named due to 
current nomenclature confusions in the literature. However, a new system 
has recently been introduced in an attempt to rationalise the increasingly 
complex set of names used to describe superfamily members [1].

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPAR) are ligand-activated
transcription factors that belong to the nuclear hormone receptor 
superfamily. Three cDNAs encoding PPARs have been isolated from Xenopus
laevis: xPPAR alpha, beta and gamma [4]. All three xPPARs appear to be
activated by both synthetic peroxisome proliferators and naturally occurring
fatty acids, suggesting a common mode of action for all members of this 
subfamily of receptors [4]. Furthermore, the multiplicity of the receptors
suggests the existence of hitherto unknown cellular signalling pathways for
xenobiotics and putative endogenous ligands [5]. 

A cDNA corresponding to the hamster PPAR (haPPAR) gamma has been isolated 
[6]. haPPAR gamma mRNA is highly expressed in adipose tissue, and to a
lesser extent in lung, heart, kidney, liver and spleen, and may thus 
function in activating the transcription of target genes in a variety of
tissues, including those not particularly subjected to peroxisomal beta-
oxidation [6]. haPPAR gamma binds efficiently in the presence of retinoid X
receptor alpha (RXR alpha) to a peroxisome proliferator response element
(PPRE) first identified in the acyl-CoA oxidase (ACO) promoter, the rate-
limiting enzyme of peroxisomal beta-oxidation [6]. 

A human cognate of the mouse PPAR-gamma (hPPAR gamma) has been cloned from
a placental cDNA library [7]. Sequence analysis reveals a high degree of
similarity to the mouse receptor (mPPAR) and, like other PPARs, hPPAR gamma
forms heterodimers with RXR alpha. hPPAR gamma is expressed strongly in 
adipose tissue, but significant levels are also detectable in placenta, lung
and ovary [7]. In vitro trans-activation data suggest hPPAR gamma is only
poorly activated by xenobiotic peroxisome proliferators, although certain
fatty acids and eicosanoids are potent activators of this receptor [7]. Both
mPARR and hPPAR gamma may be activated by thiazolidinedione drugs, although
the receptors appear to differ in their sensitivity to these compounds [7].
These data suggest a high degree of structural and functional similarity
between mPARR and hPPAR gamma, and provide evidence for variation in human
receptor structure that may result in differential sensitivity to 
activators [7]. 

PROXISOMPAGR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
peroxisome proliferator-activated gamma receptors. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise the gamma receptors but distinguish them
from the rest of the PPAR family - motifs 1-4 lie N-terminal to the zinc
finger domain; motif 5 lies between the zinc fingers and the putative
ligand-binding domain; and motif 6 resides within this latter domain.
Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 11 sequences was identified.
