ANNEXINPLANT
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster, Xenopus
laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and Neurospora 
crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from those found in
other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium binding sites are found within
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as 
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity,
exocytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the
extracellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA
replication [2].

As well as possessing fewer annexin proteins, expression of annexins in
plants is generally restricted to two subtypes. However, seven annexin
paralogues have been identified in Arabidopsis, suggesting that larger
annexin gene families may exist in some plants [5].

ANNEXINPLANT is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
the plant annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an intitial alignment
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
central portion of the alignment, focusing on those sections that 
characterise plant annexins but distinguish them from other closely related
annexin subtypes - motif 1 lies in the first putative core repeat; motif 2
resides between repeats 2 and 3, including part of the N-terminal portion 
of the third repeat; and motif 3 spans repeats 3 and 4. Five iterations on
SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 23 sequences was identified.
