LANTIREGPROT
Pathogenic bacteria produce a number of virulence factors to facilitate
host infection, and to combat competing species [1]. Antibiotics are 
secreted by some pathogenic prokaryotes to lyse cells, some of which have 
been adapted by humans for use against virulent microbes. Amongst these are 
the lantibiotics, produced exclusively by Gram-positive bacteria. 
Lantibiotics are small, heavily post-translationally modified peptides that 
inhibit rival cell growth and are strongly cationic [1]. 

Lantibiotic genes reside on the bacterial chromosome, where they cluster 
with genes that adapt and secrete them to the extracellular space [2]. Many 
of these so-called 'pathogenicity islands' have been characterised, 
including the epidermin (epi) cluster in Staphylococcus epidermis [2], and 
the nisin (nis) cluster in Lactococcus lactis [3]. The gene encoding the 
lantibiotic is flanked by 3 regulatory genes: 2 that are usually involved in
a 2-component regulatory system, and another that cleaves the signal peptide
from the precursor to produce the mature lantibiotic.

The archetypal example of lantibiotic synthesis is witnessed in the L.lactis
nis operon [4]. In this cluster, the 2-component regulatory system is 
controlled by the nisK/nisR genes. NisK is believed to function as a 
membrane-associated protein kinase that phosphorylates NisR in response to 
external stimuli [4]. It shows some similarity to other bacterial kinases, 
and contains a single histidine kinase domain [4]. 

LANTIREGPROT is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
lantibiotic regulatory proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes the
N-terminal portion of the first putative TM domain; and motifs 7-11 span the
histidine kinase domain (motif 7 includes a putative phosphorylation site). 
A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, no
further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial
matches were found, Q97KT5 and Q9CNJ9, both bacterial regulatory protein 
kinases that match motifs 7 and 11.
