BKCHANNELB
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].

Structurally, calcium (Ca2+) activated channels belong to the subfamily of
K+ channels whose subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are
the voltage-gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+
channels and 3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channel (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All
K+ channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif that
resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane-spanning helices, and forms 
the K+-selective pore domain [1].

Ca2+-activated K+ channels are a diverse group of channels that are
activated by an increase in intracellular Ca2+ concentration. They are
found in the majority of nerve cells, where they modulate cell excitability
and action potential. Three types of Ca2+-activated K+ channel have been
characterised, termed small-conductance (SK), intermediate conductance (IK)
and large conductance (BK) respectively [2-3].

BK channels (also referred to as maxi-K channels) are widely expressed 
in the body, being found in glandular tissue, smooth and skeletal muscle, 
as well as in neural tissues. They have been demonstrated to regulate 
arteriolar and airway diameter, and also neurotransmitter release. Each
channel complex is thought to be composed of 2 types of subunit: the pore-
forming (alpha) subunits and smaller accessory (beta) subunits.

The alpha subunit of the BK channel was initially thought to share the
characteristic 6TM organisation of the voltage-gated K+ channels. However,
the molecule is now thought to possess an additional TM domain, with an 
extracellular N-terminus and intracellular C-terminus. This C-terminal 
region contains 4 predominantly hydrophobic domains, which are also thought
to lie intracellularly. The extracellular N-terminus and the first TM region
are required for modulation by the beta subunit. The precise location of the
Ca2+-binding site that modulates channel activation remains unknown, but it
is thought to lie within the C-terminal hydrophobic domains.

The beta subunit (which is thought to possess 2 TM domains) increases the
Ca2+ sensitivity of the BK channel [5]. It does this by enhancing the time
spent by the channel in burst-like open states. However, it has little 
effect on the durations of closed intervals between bursts, or on the
numbers of open and closed states entered during gating [6].

BKCHANNELB is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
calcium-activated BK potassium channel beta subunit. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length,
focusing on those sections that characterise the BK channel beta subunits
but distinguish them from other members of the K+ channel superfamily: motif
1 resides at the N-terminus, leading into the first putative TM domain;
motif 2 lies within the first TM domain; and motifs 3 and 4 reside within 
the linker region between the 2 TM domains. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f 
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11
sequences was identified.
