SECBCHAPRONE
Secretion across the inner membrane in some Gram-negative bacteria occurs
via the preprotein translocase pathway. Proteins are produced in the 
cytoplasm as precursors, and require a chaperone subunit to direct them to 
the translocase component. [1]. From there, the mature proteins are either 
targeted to the outer membrane, or remain as periplasmic proteins [1]. The 
translocase protein subunits are encoded on the bacterial chromosome.

The translocase itself comprises 7 proteins, including a chaperone protein
(SecB), an ATPase (SecA), an integral membrane complex (SecCY, SecE and 
SecG), and two additional membrane proteins that promote the release of 
the mature peptide into the periplasm (SecD and SecF) [1]. The chaperone 
protein SecB [2] is a highly acidic homotetrameric protein that exists
as a "dimer of dimers" in the bacterial cytoplasm [2]. SecB maintains 
preproteins in an unfolded state after translation, and targets these to 
the peripheral membrane protein ATPase SecA for secretion [3].

Recently, the tertiary structure of Haemophilus influenzae SecB was resolved
by means of X-ray crystallography to 2.5A [4]. The chaperone comprises four
chains, forming a tetramer, each chain of which has a simple alpha+beta fold
arrangement. While one binding site on the homotetramer recognises unfolded
polypeptides by hydrophobic interactions, the second binds to SecA through
the latter's C-terminal 22 residues [4].

SECBCHAPRONE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial protein-transport SecB chaperone protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif
1 spans beta-strand 1 and the N-terminus of alpha-helix 1; motif 2 spans
strand 4 and the N-terminus of helix 2; motif 3 encompasses the C-terminus
of helix 2 and helix 3; and motif 4 spans most of helix 4. Three iterations
on SPTR39.22_17.3f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true
set comprising 13 sequences was identified.
