PHYTOCHROME
Phytochrome belongs to a family of plant photoreceptors that mediate
physiological and developmental responses to changes in red and far-red 
light conditions [1-3]. The protein undergoes reversible photochemical
conversion between a biologically-inactive red light-absorbing form and
the active far-red light-absorbing form. Phytochrome is a dimer of identical
124kDa subunits, each of which contains a linear tetrapyrrole chromophore,
covalently-attached via a Cys residue.

In Arabidopsis, there are genes for at least five phytochrome proteins [2,3].
These photoreceptors control such responses as germination, stem elongation,
flowering, gene expression, and chloroplast and leaf development. It is not
yet known which red light responses are controlled by which phytochrome
species, or whether the different phytochromes have overlapping functions. 

The deduced amino acid sequences of phytochrome genes phyA, phyB and phyC 
show high levels of sequence identity with the major etiolated-tissue
phytochrome apoproteins from other plant species. The proteins are of
similar molecular mass, have related hydropathic profiles, and contain a
conserved chromophore attachment region [2]. Sequence comparison data 
indicate that the three phy genes diverged early in plant evolution, well 
before the divergence of the two major groups of angiosperms, the monocots
and dicots [2]. Experimental evidence suggests that the red/far light-
responsive phytochrome photoreceptor system in A.thaliana, and possibly
all higher plants, consists of a family of chromoproteins that are 
heterogeneous in structure and regulation. 

Synechocystis strain PCC 6803 hypothetical protein slr0473 contains a domain
similar to that of plants phytochrome and seems also to bind a chromophore.

PHYTOCHROME is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
phytochromes. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 10
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the N-
terminal chromophore binding domain - motif 3 includes the region encoded
by PROSITE pattern PHYTOCHROME_1 (PS00245), which contains the chromophore
attachment site. Four iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 42 sequences was
identified. Numerous partial matches were also found, most of which are
fragments.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 39 sequences, and 2
partial matches.
