PSYCHOSINER
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Psychosine is a glycosphingolipid implicated in the pathology of globoid
cell leukodystrophy (GLD), a hereditary metabolic disorder that results from
the absence of the enzyme galactosyl ceramide. This deficiency results in
the accumulation of psychosine in the brain, leading to apoptosis of
oligodendrocytes, progressive demyelination and the existence of large,
multinuclear cells (globoid cells) derived from microglia [6]. 

The molecular mechanism by which these toxic effects might be mediated has
recently been elucidated by the identification of TDAG8, an orphan G
protein-coupled receptor, as a receptor for psychosine [6]. TDAG8 is
expressed at high levels in the spleen, peripheral blood leukocytes, lymph
nodes and lung. Activation of the receptor in RH7777 hepatoma cells by
psychosine and related lysoglycolipids results in a pertussis toxin-
insensitive inhibition of forskolin-induced cAMP accummulation, possibly 
through coupling to Gz proteins [6].

PSYCHOSINER is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
psychosine receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections within N- and
C-terminal and loop regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment that
characterise the psychosine receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 resides at the N-terminus; motif 2
spans the first cytoplasmic loop; motif 3 encodes the first external loop;
motif 4 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 5 and 6 reside in the
second external loop; motif 7 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 8 
resides in the C-terminal portion of the third external loop; and motifs 9
and 10 lie at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR40_18f was required
to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the 
starting set.
