TROPOELASTIN
Tropoelastin is the precursor to the elastin molecule. Elastin aggregates
are responsible for the stretch properties of skin, arterial walls and
ligaments [1], and elastin is implicated in several hereditary diseases,
including cutis laxa (where the elasticity of the skin is lost) and
elastoderma (similar to cutis laxa but with grape-like accumulations of
elastin in the dermis).

Normally, the elastin gene contains 36 exons, and this structure allows the
formation of stable isoforms by alternative splicing. The 3-dimensional
structure of elastin is currently unknown and was originally thought to be
an amorphous polymer. This is consistent with the theory of rubber
elasticity, which requires the resting state of the protein to be of
higher disorder (entropy) than the extended state [2].

More recent studies show the presence of helical and other secondary
structures [3], and the elasticity theory has been amended to involve, in
the resting state, secondary structure elements in chaotic motion. In the
extended state of the protein, the secondary structures align to form an
ordered structure together with neighbouring molecules [2].

Tropoelastin consists mainly of repetitive elements of four, five, six and
nine hydrophobic residues [4]. The five, six and nine residue repeats
function as binding sites for fibroblasts during chemotaxis (the hexapeptide
and nonapeptide repeats competing for the same receptor) [5]. The
hexapeptide repeat is also known to bind calcium ions [1].

The formation of the elastin fibre is a complicated process, involving the
binding of a chaperone to the precursor to prevent aggregation in the cell,
followed by migration out of the cell, whereupon the chaperone
disassociates. The tropoelastin molecules then cross-link to each other
using deaminated lysine residues, the microfibril structures functioning as
a scaffold [2].

TROPOELASTIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
tropoelastin family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length - motif 1 partially encodes the N-terminal signal
peptide; motifs 2 and 3 reside within central domains adjacent to repetitive
regions; and motif 4 spans the C-terminal microfibril-binding area. Two
iterations on SPTR39_14f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified.
