GPR37ORPHANR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Several 7TM receptors have been cloned but their endogenous ligands are
unknown; these have been termed orphan receptors. GPR37 was isolated from a
set of human brain frontal lobe expressed sequence tags. The GPR37 genomic
sequence was subsequently mapped to chromosome 7. A putative orthologue, 83%
identical to the human form in terms of predicted amino acid sequence, has
since been identified in the mouse genome and mapped to chromosome 6.
Northern blot analyses revealed a highly expressed 3.8kb mRNA and a less
abundant 8kb mRNA in both human and mouse brain. The 3.8kb mRNA was also
less abundantly expressed in human liver and placenta, and a further 3kb
mRNA was found in mouse testis [6,7].

GPR37ORPHANR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
GPR37 orphan receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within the C-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those areas of the
alignment that characterise the GPR37 receptors but distinguish them from
the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 spans the first
external loop; motifs 2 and 3 span the second external loop, leading into
TM domain 5; motif 4 lies within TM domain 5; motif 5 lies at the C-terminus
of TM domain 5, leading into the third cytoplasmic loop; and motif 6 lies
at the C-terminus of TM domain 7. Two iterations on SPTR39_14f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was
identified.
