CRFFAMILY
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), urotensin-I, urocortin and sauvagine
form a family of related neuropeptides in vertebrates. The family can be
grouped into 2 separate paralogous lineages, with urotensin-I, urocortin and
sauvagine in one group and CRF forming the other group. Urocortin and
sauvagine appear to represent orthologues of fish urotensin-I in mammals and
amphibians, respectively. The peptides have a variety of physiological
effects on stress and anxiety, vasoregulation, thermoregulation, growth and
metabolism, metamorphosis and reproduction in various species, and are all
released as preprohormones [1].

CRF is found mainly in the paraventricular nucleus of the mammalian hypo-
thalamus (PVN), where it is released into the portal vessels. From here, CRF
is transported to the anterior pituitary, stimulating adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) release via CRF type 1 receptors, thereby activating the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical axis (HPA) and thus glucocorticoid
release. Urocortin is also found in mammalian brain; however, the
distribution of its mRNA is quite different from CRF, highest expression 
levels being found in the Edinger-Westphal (EW) nucleus. In addition, 
urocortin exhibits a much greater potency at CRF type 2 receptors, which 
are absent from the anterior pituitary [2]. Urotensin-I is released
from the urophysis of fish, and produces ACTH and subsequent cortisol 
release in vivo. The nonhormonal portion of the prohormone is thought to be
the urotensin binding protein (urophysin). Sauvagine, isolated from frog 
skin, has a potent hypotensive and diuretic effect.

CRFFAMILY is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
corticotropin-releasing factor related neuropeptides. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the C-terminal peptide portion of the alignment. 
Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set comprising 17 sequences was identified.
