CD40LIGAND
CD40 ligand (CD40L or CD154) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor  
(TNF) family of cell-surface proteins and soluble cytokines that plays a 
critical role in both thymus-dependent humoral immunity and cellular immune 
responses. It has been implicated in biological pathways involving 
epithelial cells, fibroblasts and platelets. It is involved in T cell-
mediated B cell activation, a process that occurs through the interaction
of CD40L on activated T cells with CD40 receptor expressed on B cells. It
results in various B cell responses, including immunoglobulin isotype 
switching and B cell differentiation and proliferation, upregulation 
of surface molecules contributing to antigen presentation, development of 
the germinal centre, as well as regulation of apoptosis [1,3-6]. 

Several distinct structural motifs in the CD40 cytoplasmic domain regulate 
various signalling pathways, which involve both the TNF-R associated factors
(TRAFs) and additional signalling proteins, leading to the activation of
kinases and transcription factors. The physiological importance of CD40L has
been demonstrated by the fact that expression of defective CD40L proteins 
causes an immunodeficiency state known as the hyper-IgM syndrome, 
characterised by an inability to produce immunoglubulins of the IgG, IgA and
IgE isotypes, indicating faulty T-cell dependent B-cell activation [3,4,7].

The CD40L sequence is compatible with the jelly-roll beta-strand structure
characteristic of the TNFs. Like the TNFs, CD40L is predicted to form a 
compact trimer, although the interactions between monomers are distinct
from those found in the TNFs. A high degree of structural conservation with
low similarity at the primary structure level is not without precedent among
proteins with a high beta-strand content: among the lipocalins, for example,
the sequences of the bilin- and retinol-binding proteins are only 16% 
identical, yet their 3D structural alignment differs by less than 2A in 
their alpha-carbon positions.

A 3D model of CD40L based on the known structure of TNFalpha has been built.
According to the model, CD40L is no more different from TNFalpha or TNFbeta
than they are from each other. However, although the receptor-binding
domains of these 3 molecules are extremely similar in structure, the N-
terminal domains of the proteins are quite different. Moreover, considerable 
differences are apparent in several loops, including those predicted to be
involved in CD40 binding. TNFbeta is a classical secreted protein containing
a signal peptide - no transmembrane (TM) form has been detected; TNFalpha,
on the other hand, is synthesised as a type II TM protein and then undergoes
post-translational cleavage, liberating the extracellular domain (i.e., the
trimer) as a soluble effector - nevertheless a substantial amount of 
TNFalpha remains associated with the membrane. CD40L seems to lie at the
other end of the spectrum, in that it has not been detected as a naturally
occurring secretory product. Ironically, it may function as a receptor for
one of the many soluble forms of members of the TNF receptor family [2].

CD40LIGAND is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the CD40 
ligand (CD154) family of proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 encodes the
type II membrane protein signal sequence; motif 3 encompasses beta-strand 8;
and motif 4 spans alpha-helix 1 and strand 11. Two iterations on SPTR39_17f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11
sequences was identified.
