TATBPROTEIN
Translocation of proteins across the two membranes of Gram-negative bacteria
can be carried out via a number of routes. Most proteins marked for export 
carry a secretion signal at their N-terminus, and are secreted by the
general secretory pathway. The signal peptide is cleaved as they pass 
through the outer membrane. Other secretion systems include the type III
system found in a select group of Gram-negative plant and animal pathogens,
and the CagA system of Helicobacter pylori [1].

In some bacterial species, however, there exists a system that operates 
independently of the Sec pathway [2]. It selectively translocates 
periplasmic-bound molecules that are synthesised with, or are in close 
association with, "partner" proteins bearing an (S/T)RRXFLK twin arginine 
motif at the N-terminus. The pathway is therefore termed the Twin-Arginine 
Translocation or TAT system. Surprisingly, the four components that make up 
the TAT system are structurally and mechanistically related to a pH-
dependent import system in plant chloroplast thylakoid membranes [2]. The
gene products responsible for the Sec-independent pathway are called TatA,
TatB, TatC and TatE.

TatB is essential for the secretion of these specific proteins, and forms a
scaffold upon which TatC assembles in the membrane. Deletion studies have 
shown that it is crucial in the forming of the TAT complex, and is therefore 
necessary for the correct working of the system.

TATBPROTEIN is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial sec-independent translocation TatB protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning the N-terminal half of the alignment - motif
1 encodes the N-terminal putative transmembrane domain. Eight iterations on 
SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 230 sequences was identified. A number of partial matches were 
also found, all of which are known or putative TatB proteins that fail to
make a significant match to motifs 1 or 3.
