BACEFAMILY
One of the major neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD)
is the progressive formation in the brain of insoluble amyloid plaques and 
vascular deposits consisting of beta-amyloid protein (beta-APP) [1].
Production of beta-APP requires proteolytic cleavage of the large type-1 
transmembrane (TM) protein amyloid precursor protein (APP) [2]. This process
is performed by a variety of enzymes known as secretases. To initiate 
beta-APP formation, beta-secretase cleaves APP to release a soluble 
N-terminal fragment (APPsBeta) and a C-terminal fragment that remains 
membrane bound. This fragment is subsequently cleaved by gamma-secretase 
to liberate beta-APP.

Several independent studies identified a novel TM aspartic protease as the
major beta-secretase [3,4,5]. This protein, termed beta-site APP cleaving
enzyme 1 (BACE1), shares 64% amino acid sequence similarity with a second
enzyme, termed BACE2. Together, BACE1 and BACE2 define a novel family of 
aspartyl proteases [6]. Both enzymes share significant sequence similarity
with other members of the pepsin family of aspartyl proteases and contain 
the two characteristic D(T/S)G(T/S) motifs that form the catalytic site.
However, by contrast with other aspartyl proteases, BACE1 and BACE2 are
type I TM proteins. Each protein comprises a large lumenal domain containing
the active centre, a single TM domain and a small cytoplasmic tail.

BACEFAMILY is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
beta-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE) family. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 19 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those regions that characterise the BACE family but distinguish it from
closely related proteases. Three iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 22 sequences was
identified. Five partial matches were also found, all of which are BACE
family homologues that fail to make signficant matches with one or more
motifs.
