TNFACTORR19L
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 19-like (also known as receptor expressed in lymphoid tissues 
(RELT)) is abundantly expressed in hematologic tissues such as spleen, lymph
node, and peripheral blood leukocytes, as well as in leukemias and 
lymphomas [7]. The receptor may play a role in the regulation of immune 
responses [7].

TNFACTORR19L is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 19-like. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions in the N-terminal three quarters of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise TNF receptor 19-like but distinguish it from
other TNF receptor subtypes - motifs 1, 2 and 3 lie within the extracellular 
N-terminal region, and motifs 4 and 5 reside within the intracellular 
C-terminal region. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was 
identified. A single partial match was also found, B3KPY6_HUMAN, a 
translated human cDNA sequence that fails to match motifs 1-3.
