PRPRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Hypothalamic peptide hormones regulate secretion of anterior pituitary 
hormones, such as growth hormone, follicle stimulating hormone, luteinising
hormone and thyrotropin. A novel bioactive peptide has been identified from 
bovine hypothalamus and found to increase prolactin secretion from the 
anterior pituitary [6]. This peptide - prolactin-releasing peptide (PrRP) -
is a member of the structurally related RF-amide family, which includes 
neuropeptide FF [8]. The peptide exists in two forms: a 31-amino acid form
and a truncated 20-amino acid form [6]. PrRP has been found in the medulla
oblongata, hypothalamus and pituitary, as well as in a number of other 
tissues [7]. This distribution suggests the peptide may have other roles
in addition to prolactin release [7].

The receptor for PrRP was identified to be an orphan receptor, previously
known as GPR10 [6]. This receptor is expressed in the central nervous 
system with highest levels in the pituitary. Expression has also been 
detected in the cerebellum, brainstem, hypothalamus, thalamus and spinal
cord in rat [7]. Binding of PrRP to the receptor results in activation of 
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) in a mainly pertussis toxin
sensitive manner, suggesting coupling to Gi/o proteins [8]. PrRP can also
cause increases in intracellular calcium and activation of c-Jun 
N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) in a pertussis toxin insensitive manner,
indicating that the receptor can also couple to Gq proteins, depending on 
the cell type in which it is expressed [8].

PRPRECEPTOR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
prolactin-releasing peptide receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
sections within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the 
alignment that characterise the prolactin-releasing peptide receptors but 
distinguish them from the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motifs 1 
and 2 lie at the N-terminus; motif 3 spans the C-terminal portion of TM 
domain 2 and part of the first external loop; motif 4 encodes the 
N-terminal portion of TM domain 3; motif 5 spans the second external loop; 
motif 6 spans the C-terminal portion of TM domain 5, leading into the third 
cytoplasmic loop; motif 7 encodes the rest of the third cytoplasmic loop; 
motif 8 spans the third external loop, leading into TM domain 7; and motifs 
9 and 10 lie at the C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR39_15f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 3 sequences was
identified.
