KIR62CHANNEL
Potassium channels are found in virtually all cell types. Their pore-
forming subunits fall into three structural families, i.e. those possessing
six, four and two transmembrane (TM) domains. The six-TM domain K+ channels
can be further subdivided into six families: the voltage-gated K+ channels
(Kv), the KCNQ channels, the eag-like K+ channels, and three Ca2+-activated
K+ channels. Inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir) are the principal class
of two-TM domain K+ channels, and the recently-discovered two-pore domain
K+ channels, make up a family of four-TM domain K+ channels.

Inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) are responsible for regulating
diverse processes including: cellular excitability, vascular tone, heart
rate, renal salt flow, and insulin release [1]. To date, around twenty
members of this superfamily have been cloned, which can be grouped into six
families by sequence similarity - these are designated Kir1.x-7.x [2,3].

Cloned Kir channel cDNAs encode proteins of between ~370-500 residues,
containing two predicted TM domains, with the characteristic K+ channel
pore-forming domain located between them. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be cytoplasmic, and the N-terminus lacks a signal sequence. It is thought
that four Kir subunits assemble to form a tetrameric channel complex, which
may be hetero- or homomeric [1].

Kir6.x inward rectifier K+ channel family subunits associate with
sulphonylurea receptors (SURs) to form ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP) channels.
These are octameric complexes containing equal numbers of Kir and SUR
subunits. The resulting channels are regulated by cytosolic nucleotides,
such as ATP, and thus link cell metabolism to electrical activity, and K+
fluxes. They are important in the regulation of insulin secretion, the
control of vascular and smooth muscle tone, and the response of the heart
(and possibly the brain) to ischaemia.

Kir6.2 (also known as BIR/KATP) is thought to associate with SUR1 to form
the pancreatic beta cell KATP channel that is involved in regulation of
insulin secretion. Combination of Kir6.2 with splice variants of SUR2 is
thought to produce the cardiac and smooth muscle KATP isoforms [4].

KIR62CHANNEL is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kir6.2 inward rectifier K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise Kir6.2 but distinguish it from other subtypes -
motif 1 resides within the putative cytoplasmic C-terminus; motifs 2-3 lie
between the first TM domain and the following pore-forming (H5) domain; and
motifs 4-7 encode portions of the cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single
iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
