ANIONEXHNGR3
Anion exchange proteins are thought to participate in pH and cell volume
regulation. They are glycosylated, plasma-membrane transport proteins that
exchange hydrogen carbonate (HCO3-) for chloride (Cl-) in a reversible,
electroneutral manner [1,2]. To date three anion exchanger isoforms have
been identified (AE1-3), AE1 being the previously-characterised erythrocyte
band 3 protein. They share a predicted topology of 12-14 transmembrane (TM)
domains, but have differing distribution patterns and cellular localisation.
The best characterised isoform, AE1, is known to be the most abundant
membrane protein in mature erythrocytes. It has a molecular mass of ~95 kDa
and consists of two major domains. The N-terminal 390 residues form a water-
soluble, highly elongated domain that serves as an attachment site for the
binding of the membrane skeleton and other cytoplasmic proteins. The 
remainder of the protein is a 55kDa hydrophobic domain that is responsible
for catalysing anion exchange. The function of the analogous domains of AE2
and AE3 remains to be determined [3].

AE3 is an anion exchanger that is primarily expressed in the brain and
heart. Several tissue-specific variants have been identified, which arise
due to both alternative promoter and exon usage. Two AE3-encoding cDNAs have
been isolated from human heart. These clones share long portions of common 
sequence but have different 5' ends, therefore encoding distinct N-terminal
amino acid sequences. The longer AE3 polypeptide (1232 amino acids) displays
~96% amino acid sequence identity to the rat and mouse AE3 'brain isoforms'.
The shorter polypeptide (1034 amino acids) corresponds to the rat AE3 
'cardiac isoform'. Studies of Cl- transport suggest that both isoforms are
capable of anion exchange [4,5].

ANIONEXHNGR3 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
anion exchanger isoform 3. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
within the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise the anion exchanger isoform 3 but distinguish it from others -
motifs 1-4 reside within the large putative cytoplasmic N-terminus. Two
iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified.
