CLCHANNELPLT
Chloride channels (CLCs) constitute an evolutionarily well-conserved family
of voltage-gated channels that are structurally unrelated to the other known
voltage-gated channels. They are found in organisms ranging from bacteria to
yeasts and plants, and also to animals. Their functions in higher animals
likely include the regulation of cell volume, control of electrical 
excitability and trans-epithelial transport [1].

The first member of the family (CLC-0) was expression-cloned from the
electric organ of Torpedo marmorata [2], and subsequently nine CLC-like
proteins have been cloned from mammals. They are thought to function as
multimers of two or more identical or homologous subunits, and they have
varying tissue distributions and functional properties. To date, CLC-0, 
CLC-1, CLC-2, CLC-4 and CLC-5 have been demonstrated to form functional Cl-
channels; whether the remaining isoforms do so is either contested or 
unproven. One possible explanation for the difficulty in expressing 
activatable Cl- channels is that some of the isoforms may function as Cl- 
channels of intracellular compartments, rather than of the plasma membrane.
However, they are all thought to have a similar transmembrane (TM) topology,
initial hydropathy analysis suggesting 13 hydrophobic stretches long enough
to form putative TM domains [2]. Recently, the postulated TM topology has
been revised, and it now seems likely that the CLCs have 10 (or possibly 12)
TM domains, with both N- and C-termini residing in the cytoplasm [3].

A number of human disease-causing mutations have been identified in the
genes encoding CLCs. Mutations in CLCN1, the gene encoding CLC-1, the major
skeletal muscle Cl- channel, lead to both recessively and dominantly-
inherited forms of muscle stiffness or myotonia [4]. Similarly, mutations
in CLCN5, which encodes CLC-5, a renal Cl- channel, lead to several forms 
of inherited kidney stone disease [5]. These mutations have been
demonstrated to reduce or abolish CLC function.

In plants, chloride channels contribute to a number of plant-specific
functions, such as regulation of turgor, stomatal movement, nutrient
transport and metal tolerance. By contrast with Cl- channels in animal
cells, they are also responsible for the generation of action potentials.
The best documented examples are the chloride channels of guard cells,
which control opening and closing of stomata. Recently, four homologous
proteins that belong to the CLC family have been cloned from Arabidopsis
thaliana (mouse ear-cress) [6]. Hydropathy analysis suggests that they have
a similar membrane topology to other CLC proteins, with up to 12 TM domains.
Expression in Xenopus oocytes failed to generate measurable Cl- currents, 
although protein analysis suggested they had been synthesised and inserted
into cell membranes. However, similar CLC proteins have since been cloned 
from other plants, and one, CIC-Nt1 (from tobacco), has been demonstrated to
form funtional Cl- channels, suggesting that at least some of these proteins
do function as Cl- channels in plants (7).

CLCHANNELPLT is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for plant
CLC voltage-gated Cl- channels. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions from 
the N-terminal two thirds of the alignment, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the plant CLC Cl- channels but distinguish them from others -
motif 1 resides within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; motif 2 lies
within the sixth hydrophilic domain; motif 3 resides within the sixth
hydrophobic domain; motif 4 encodes the C-terminus of the sixth hydrophobic
domain, and leads into the subsequent hydrophilic region; and motif 5 lies
within the ninth hydrophilic domain. Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 9
sequences was identified.
