AMINACHANNEL
The apical membrane of many tight epithelia contains sodium channels that
are primarily characterised by their high affinity to the diuretic blocker
amiloride [1-4]. These channels mediate the first step of active sodium
reabsorption essential for the maintenance of body salt and water
homeostasis [1]. In vertebrates, the channels control reabsorption of
sodium in kidney, colon, lung and sweat glands; they also play a role in
taste perception. 

Members of the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) family fall into four 
subfamilies, termed alpha, beta, gamma and delta [3]. The proteins exhibit
the same apparent topology, each with two transmembrane (TM) spanning
segments, separated by a large extracellular loop. In most ENaC proteins
studied to date, the extracellular domains are highly conserved and contain
numerous cysteine residues, with flanking C-terminal amphipathic TM regions,
postulated to contribute to the formation of the hydrophilic pores of the 
oligomeric channel protein complexes. It is thought that the well-conserved
extracellular domains serve as receptors to control the activities of the 
channels [3]. 

Vertebrate ENaC proteins are similar to degenerins of Caenorhabditis elegans
[5]: deg-1, del-1, mec-4, mec-10 and unc-8. These proteins can be mutated to
cause neuronal degradation, and are also thought to form sodium channels.

AMINACHANNEL is a 13-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
amiloride-sensitive sodium channels. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans
putative TM domain 1; motifs 2-12 reside in the central extracellular
domain; and motif 13 encodes the N-terminus of putative TM domain 2. Two
iterations on OWL31.1 were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 30 sequences was identified. Numerous partial matches
were also found, all of which are homologues and fragments that fail to
match six or more motifs.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 25 sequences, and 32
partial matches.
