CLCHANNELKDY
Chloride channels (CLCs) constitute an evolutionarily well-conserved family
of voltage-gated channels that are structurally unrelated to the other known
voltage-gated channels. They are found in organisms ranging from bacteria to
yeasts and plants, and also to animals. Their functions in higher animals
likely include the regulation of cell volume, control of electrical 
excitability and trans-epithelial transport [1].

The first member of the family (CLC-0) was expression-cloned from the
electric organ of Torpedo marmorata [2], and subsequently nine CLC-like
proteins have been cloned from mammals. They are thought to function as
multimers of two or more identical or homologous subunits, and they have
varying tissue distributions and functional properties. To date, CLC-0, 
CLC-1, CLC-2, CLC-4 and CLC-5 have been demonstrated to form functional Cl-
channels; whether the remaining isoforms do so is either contested or 
unproven. One possible explanation for the difficulty in expressing 
activatable Cl- channels is that some of the isoforms may function as Cl- 
channels of intracellular compartments, rather than of the plasma membrane.
However, they are all thought to have a similar transmembrane (TM) topology,
initial hydropathy analysis suggesting 13 hydrophobic stretches long enough
to form putative TM domains [2]. Recently, the postulated TM topology has
been revised, and it now seems likely that the CLCs have 10 (or possibly 12)
TM domains, with both N- and C-termini residing in the cytoplasm [3].

A number of human disease-causing mutations have been identified in the
genes encoding CLCs. Mutations in CLCN1, the gene encoding CLC-1, the major
skeletal muscle Cl- channel, lead to both recessively and dominantly-
inherited forms of muscle stiffness or myotonia [4]. Similarly, mutations
in CLCN5, which encodes CLC-5, a renal Cl- channel, lead to several forms 
of inherited kidney stone disease [5]. These mutations have been
demonstrated to reduce or abolish CLC function.

Two highly similar members of the CLC family have been cloned that appear
to be kidney-specific isoforms. These are known as CLC-Ka and CLC-Kb in
humans and are ~90% identical (at the amino acid level); in other species,
they are named CLC-K1 and CLC-K2 [6,7]. Within species, the two isoforms
show differing distribution patterns in the kidney, possibly suggesting
diferent roles in renal function. To date, attempts at functional expression
of CLC-K isoforms have not yielded measurable Cl- currents; however, that
they play a key role in normal kidney function had been made clear by the 
fact that naturally occurring mutations in the human gene CLCNKB (encoding
CLC-Kb) lead to a form of Bartter's syndrome, an inherited kidney disease 
characterised by hypokalaemic alkalosis [8]. Similarly, transgenic mice,
whose CLC-K1 channel has been rendered dysfunctional by targeted gene 
disruption, develop overt diabetes, suggesting that these channels are
important for urinary concentration [9].

CLCHANNELKDY is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
CLC-K voltage-gated Cl- channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions within the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise CLC-K Cl- channel isoforms but distinguish
them from others - motif 1 resides within the putative cytoplasmic
N-terminus; motifs 2 and 3 lie within the third and fourth hydrophobic
domains, respectively; motif 4 encodes the C-terminal portion of the sixth
hydrophobic domain, and leads into the subsequent hydrophilic domain; and
motif 6 lies at the end of the eighth hydrophobic domain, extending into
the following hydrophilic region. Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6
sequences was identified. 
