CYTOFMRPINTP
Cytoplasmic fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) interacting protein
belongs to a highly conserved but, as yet, functionally uncharacterised
family. Absence of FMRP is responsible for pathologic manifestations in  
Fragile X Syndrome, the most frequent cause of inherited mental retardation
[1]. FMRP is an RNA-binding protein that may have a role in local protein
translation at neuronal dendrites and in dendritic spine maturation [1].
CYFIP1 and CYFIP2, which share a high level of sequence identity, have 
recently been identified as cytoplasmic FMRP interacting proteins [1].
CYFIP2 interacts with FMRP-related proteins FXR1P/2P, while CYFIP1 interacts
exclusively with FMRP. The FMRP-CYFIP interaction involves the domain of
FMRP that also mediates homo- and heteromerisation, suggesting competition
between the various interaction partners. CYFIP1 also interacts with the 
small GTPase Rac1 implicated in development and maintenance of neuronal
structures [1]. CYFIP1/2 are both present in synaptosomal extracts [1]. 

PIR121 (121F-specific p53 inducible RNA) is another functionally
uncharacterised member of this family. The PIR121 gene maps to human
chromosome 5q34, a region frequently translocated in acute myeloid leukaemia
but not known to be amplified or deleted in solid tumours. Interaction
between PIR121 and FMRP has been demonstrated, and hence PIR121 has also 
been termed CYFIP2 (Cytoplasmic FMRP Interacting Protein 2) [1,2]. 

Shyc (Selective HYbridizing Clone) is a cytoplasmic protein of unknown 
function, expressed in the developing and embryonic nervous system [3]. The
protein has also been designated CYFIP1 due to the high sequence identity
(98.7%) to its human orthologue. The CYFIP orthologues in Caenorhabditis
elegans and Drosophila melanogaster share about 51% and 67% sequence 
identity with the human proteins, respectively [1]. The high level of
conservation manifest throughout the entire CYFIP sequence between various
orthologues suggests a number of functionally/structurally important domains. 

CYTOFMRPINTP is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
cytoplasmic fragile X mental retardation protein interacting protein family.
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the
motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually the full 
alignment length. Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, Q9GM18, a hypothetical
protein from Macaca fascicularis that matches the N-terminal 3 motifs.
