CLCHANNEL4
Chloride channels (CLCs) constitute an evolutionarily well-conserved family
of voltage-gated channels that are structurally unrelated to the other known
voltage-gated channels. They are found in organisms ranging from bacteria to
yeasts and plants, and also to animals. Their functions in higher animals
likely include the regulation of cell volume, control of electrical 
excitability and trans-epithelial transport [1].

The first member of the family (CLC-0) was expression-cloned from the
electric organ of Torpedo marmorata [2], and subsequently nine CLC-like
proteins have been cloned from mammals. They are thought to function as
multimers of two or more identical or homologous subunits, and they have
varying tissue distributions and functional properties. To date, CLC-0, 
CLC-1, CLC-2, CLC-4 and CLC-5 have been demonstrated to form functional Cl-
channels; whether the remaining isoforms do so is either contested or 
unproven. One possible explanation for the difficulty in expressing 
activatable Cl- channels is that some of the isoforms may function as Cl- 
channels of intracellular compartments, rather than of the plasma membrane.
However, they are all thought to have a similar transmembrane (TM) topology,
initial hydropathy analysis suggesting 13 hydrophobic stretches long enough
to form putative TM domains [2]. Recently, the postulated TM topology has
been revised, and it now seems likely that the CLCs have 10 (or possibly 12)
TM domains, with both N- and C-termini residing in the cytoplasm [3].

A number of human disease-causing mutations have been identified in the
genes encoding CLCs. Mutations in CLCN1, the gene encoding CLC-1, the major
skeletal muscle Cl- channel, lead to both recessively and dominantly-
inherited forms of muscle stiffness or myotonia [4]. Similarly, mutations
in CLCN5, which encodes CLC-5, a renal Cl- channel, lead to several forms 
of inherited kidney stone disease [5]. These mutations have been
demonstrated to reduce or abolish CLC function.

CLC-4 was initially identified as a putative member of the CLC family 
following mapping of the human Xp22.3 chromosome region [6]. Together with
CLC-5 and CLC-3, it forms a distinct branch of the CLC gene family. Initial
expression studies of CLC-4 did not yield measurable Cl- currents; however,
recent studies of human CLC-4 have revealed that it gives rise to Cl- 
currents that rapidly activate at positive voltages, and are sensitive to
extracellular pH, with currents decreasing when pH falls below 6.5 [7].

CLCHANNEL4 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
CLC-4 voltage-gated Cl- channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
within the C-terminal two thirds of the alignment, focusing on those
sections that characterise the CLC-4 isoform but distinguish it from others
- motif 1 resides within the fourth hydrophilic domain; motifs 2 and 3 lie 
within the seventh and ninth hydrophilic domains, respectively; and motifs
4-5 reside within the putative cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single iteration 
on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set. 
