OUTRMMBRANEA
The outer membrane proteins of several Gram-negative organisms share a 
C-terminal domain of about 45 residues [1,2]: these include, outer membrane
protein ompA from enterobacteria such as E.coli; outer membrane protein P5
from Haemophilus influenzae; outer membrane protein P.III/class IV from 
Neisseria; outer membrane porin F (gene oprF) from Pseudomonas; protein
TpN50 from Treponema pallidum; peptidoglycan-associated lipoprotein (gene 
pal) from Escherichia coli, Haemophilus influenzae, Legionella pneumophila
and Pseudomonas putida; outer membrane lipoprotein P6 from Haemophilus 
influenzae; Escherichia coli hypothetical lipoprotein yiaD; and Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus sodium-type flagellar protein motY.

Apart from this domain, these proteins are not otherwise structurally 
related: most are porin-like integral membrane proteins (such as ompA),
but some are small lipid-anchored proteins (such as pal).

The amino acid sequence of major outer membrane protein II (ompA) from
E.coli K-12 has been determined [3]. The polypeptide contains 325 residues,
the transmembrane (TM) component being located between residues 1-177. In 
this region, a predominantly lipophilic 27-residue segment exists that may
span the membrane in a mostly alpha-helical conformation, or a 19-residue 
stretch of this segment might traverse the membrane linearly [3]. Inside 
the outer membrane, there exists an -APAPAPAP- sequence that, by analogy 
with the -CPPCP- sequence in the hinge region of immunoglobulin, could 
assume a polyproline helical conformation [3]. 

OmpA is required for the action of colicins K and L, and for stabilisation 
of mating aggregates in conjugation [4]. The protein serves as a receptor
for a number of phages, and also acts as a porin with low permeability,
allowing slow penetration of small solutes [4]. The size of the OmpA channel
is thought to be rather similar to that of E.coli OmpF and OmpC porins 
(i.e., about 1nm in diameter). 

OUTRMMBRANEA is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
outer membrane protein A. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the central and C-teminal portions of the alignment, focusing on
those regions that characterise ompA proteins but distinguish them from
general ompA-domain containing polypeptides - motif 1 encodes the fifth
putative TM region; motif 2 includes the C-terminal portion of putative TM 
domain 7; motif 3 spans putative TM domain 8; and motif 6 lies within the
ompA domain, and encodes part of the region encoded by PROSITE pattern OMPA
(PS01068). Two iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 18 sequences was identified. Several
partial matches were also found, all of which are outer membrane protein 
AII or P5 homologues.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences, and 8
partial matches.
