VNEBNERGLAND
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration, and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The 
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, tick 
histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Von Ebner's gland protein (VEGP), a protein highly expressed by the small 
acinar von Ebner's salivary glands of the tongue, but not in the secretory 
duct, undertakes the selective binding of sapid chemicals and their transport 
to taste receptors [5] in salivary secretions. VEGP can help to clear the 
bitter-tasting compound denatonium benzoate in vivo [6], suggesting a 
possible clearance function in taste reception, although it fails to bind
other bitter compounds [7]. VEGP is also secreted by the lachrymal gland 
into tear fluid, where, historically, it has been called tear prealbumin [8].
Together with lysozyme and lactoferrin, VEGP forms 70-80% of total tear 
protein, although diseases affecting the lachrymal gland decrease this. Tear
VEGP has been suggested to enhance the bactericial activity of lysozyme and
to have an anti-microbial function, perhaps through transported compounds
with anti-bacterial properties [9]. VEGP has been shown to bind retinol [8],
and can be co-extracted with fatty acids, particularly stearate and 
palmitate, phospholipids, glycolipids and fatty alcohols (including 
cholesterol) [9]. VEGP may act as a transporter of lipids, synthesised in 
the dorsal, or meibomian, glands of the eyelid, to the thin film they form 
at the tear-fluid/air interface. 

Recently, two lipocalins, specifically expressed in the posterior and
vomeronasal glands of the mouse nasal septum, have been identified and were
suggested to act in the chemoreception of, as yet-unidentified, small 
lipophilic pheromones [10]. One of these proteins was immunolocalised on the
vomeronasal sensory epithelium, the site of primary pheromone reception, and
the immunoreactivity was greatest during periods when contact between 
animals plays an important role in modulating behaviour.

Canis familiaris allergen 1 (Can f1) is the major allergen present in dog
dander and is produced by tongue epithelial tissue [11]. Recombinant forms
of Can f1 have been tested for immunoglobulin E (IgE) reactivity. Among dog-
allergic subjects, 45% had IgE directed exclusively to rCan f1, and 25% had
IgE to both rCan f1 and rCan f2. In addition, both recombinant proteins were
able to cross-link IgE and release histamine from peripheral blood 
leucocytes in vitro. 

VNEBNERSGLAND is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
von Ebner's gland proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise the von Ebner's gland proteins but distinguish them from
the rest of lipocalin superfamily  - motif 1 includes the GxW triplet that
forms part of the first beta-strand (cf. LIPOCALIN signature motif 1 and 
PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213)); motif 5 spans the region encoded by 
LIPOCALIN signature motif 2, which contains a TDY triplet that lies in a 
conserved part of the barrel involving the 6th and 7th beta-strands and 
the loop between them; and motif 6 spans the region encoded by LIPOCALIN 
signature motif 3, which contains an Arg (sometimes a Lys) residue that
lies in a structurally conserved region involving the final strand and
part of the loop linking it to the C-terminal alpha-helix. Two iterations 
on SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 8 sequences was identified.
