CAPSULEPROTC
Bacillus spp. are Gram-positive aerobic rods that are able to form endo-
spores that allow them to survive in almost any environment [1]. The many 
different species exhibit a wide variation of physiological abilities, their 
spores being resistant, for example, to heat, cold, disinfection and 
radiation. However, the spores require oxygen to sporulate, which has 
important consequences [1]. Of particular interest to researchers are  
B.anthracis, B.cereus and B.subtilis, all extremely pathogenic microbes that
owe their virulence to the exotoxins they secrete and to the extracellular 
polypeptide and polysaccharide capsules that protect them from the host 
immune system [1].

The capsule of B.anthracis is composed of poly-D-glutamic acid, which is the 
principal non-toxin virulence factor of the bacterium [1]. It is believed to 
inhibit host defense via evasion of macrophages, and, in conjunction with 
the lethal anthrax and oedema toxin, spreads rapidly through the host [1,2]. 
Three virulence plasmid-associated enzymes are responsible for the synthesis 
of the capsule, termed CapA, CapB and CapC [2]. The "cap" region is found on 
the B.anthracis pX02 plasmid, and is transcriptionally regulated by 
cytoplasmic levels of bicarbonate [2]. 

Further analysis of the two major B.anthracis virulence plasmids (pX02 and 
pX01) has revealed that transcription and translation of the cap synthesis 
enzymes in pX02 is essential for activation of pX01, which carries the pag, 
lef and cya exotoxin genes [3]. It is believed that, together with CapB and 
CapC, CapA forms a polyglutamyl sythetase complex to produce the mature 
polyglutamate capsule [3]. In addition, it has been suggested that CapC is 
the complex's endogenous acceptor of glutamyl residues [3].  

CAPSULEPROTC is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Bacillus capsule biosynthesis CapC proteins. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1
lies in the first putative transmembrane (TM) domain; motif 2 includes the 
N-terminal portion of the second putative TM domain; motif 3 lies 
immediately C-terminal to putative TM domain 3; and motifs 4 and 5 reside 
between putative TM domains 3 and 4, motif 5 encoding the N-terminus of 
the final TM region. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set. 
