SACTRNSFRASE
A small number of bacterial pathogens are implicated in urinary tract
infections (UTIs), amongst the most frequent infections in the developed
world. The commonest bacterium isolated from UTI is Escherichia coli, with 
streptococcal and staphylococcal species coming a close second [1]. Virulent 
microbes that colonise the human urinary tract usually possess sets of
virulence factors specific to the host environment [1]. The most common are
adhesins, molecules that allow an infection to become established; well-
characterised E.coli type I pili are a good example.

Aside from adhesins, other UTI-specific virulence moieties include: toxins, 
such as Cnf1 and hemolysin, and host biocides that act against other
microbes competing for the same niche [1]. Streptothricin, an antibiotic 
synthesised and secreted by some Gram-negative pathogens, is an example of 
the latter [2]; the antibiotic also has a toxic effect on host cells. The
biocide is synthesised in a five-step process in the bacterial cytoplasm,
and secreted to the cell exterior via the general secretory pathway [2,3]. 

The last step in the synthesis process is the acetyl co-enzyme A-dependent 
acetylation of the streptothricin molecule to the mature antibiotic. This is 
catalysed by the streptothricin acetyltransferase protein, located adjacent 
to the inner face of the cytoplasmic membrane [2,3]. Homologues of the 
original gene found in Streptomyces spp. have been found in Bacillus 
subtilis and Staphylococcus spp., as well as E.coli [2,3]. More recently, 
the streptothricin biosynthesis enzymes were shown to be related to those
that carry out non-ribosomal peptide bond formation [4].

SACTRNSFRASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
streptothricin acetyltransferases. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment (~90 amino acids).
Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified. Three partial 
matches were also found, Q47625, O33583 and Q08414, all of which are related
streptothricin/nourseothricin acetyltransferases that match two motifs. 
