VDCCGAMMA
Voltage-dependent calcium channels are a diverse family of proteins that 
encompass a variety of biological functions, including presynaptic
neurotransmitter release and protein signalling within the cell [1,2]. The
high voltage-activated (L-, N-, P-, Q- and R-type) channels comprise the 
alpha-1 subunit, which creates the pore for the import of extracellular 
calcium ions [2]. The activity of this pore is modulated by 4 tightly-
coupled subunits: an intracellular beta subunit; a transmembrane (TM) gamma
subunit; and a disulphide-linked complex of alpha-2 and delta subunits, 
which are proteolytically cleaved from the same gene product [3,4].

The voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma (VDCCG) subunit family consists 
of at least 8 members, which share a number of common structural features 
[5]. Each member is predicted to possess 4 TM domains, with intracellular
N- and C-termini. The first extracellular loop contains a highly conserved
N-glycosylation site and a pair of conserved cysteine residues. The 
C-terminal 7 residues of VDCCG-2, -3, -4 and -8 are also conserved and 
contain a consensus site for phosphorylation by cAMP and cGMP-dependent
protein kinases, and a target site for binding by PDZ domain proteins [5].

VDCCGAMMA is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma subunit proteins. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 
1 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 1 and the N-terminus of the first
extracellular loop; motif 2 encodes the C-terminus of TM domain 3 and the N-
terminus of the second extracellular loop; and motif 3 lies partly within 
the second extracellular loop and partly within TM domain 4. Three
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 28 sequences was identified. A single partial match 
was also found, Q9D563, an uncharacterised translated mouse cDNA that 
matches motifs 1 and 3.
