STREPKINASE
Streptococcal species and strains can be divided into groups, depending 
on the action of their hemolysis on blood agar, serological activity, 
biochemical reactions and antigenic variations. They are Gram-positive cocci 
that occur naturally in pairs or chains, and most are facultative anaerobes 
[1]. Streptococci occur as part of the natural human flora, but may turn 
pathogenic if transformed by the addition of virulence factors to the 
microbial genome [1].

Virulent proteins expressed by the pathogenic strains of Streptococcus spp. 
include the M protein antigen and pyrogenic exotoxins of S.pyogenes, the 
hyaluronic capsule of S.pneumoniae, and various secreted extracellular 
enzymes common to most of the virulent streptococci [2]. Streptokinase, an 
example of the latter, is secreted upon invasion of the host tissues by 
the bacterium and binds to host plasminogen, recruiting phagocytic cells to 
the site of infection [2]. The activity of this virulence factor has been
linked to acute post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis, a disease of the 
kidneys in children and the immunosuppressed [3].

Group A streptococci possess a particularly strong form of streptokinase 
that can bind not only plasminogen, but also host fibrinogen [4]. This 
close interaction with the human fibrinolytic system allows the microbe to 
acquire unregulatable cell-surface enzymatic activity, promoting further 
spread from the site of infection. The complexes formed between 
streptococcal cells, streptokinase, plasminogen and fibrinogen can lyse 
fibrin clots in the host [4]. 

The structure of the beta-domain of S.equisimilis streptokinase has been
determined to 2.4A by means of X-ray crystallography [5]. The fold is
characterised by a putative binding site for a plasminogen kringle domain
at the tip of an exposed hairpin loop. It is thought that streptokinase
proteins may exist as dimers, both when anchored to the bacterial membrane
and in solution [5].

STREPKINASE is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Streptococcus streptokinase protein family. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment (~390 amino acids)
- motif 5 encodes the N-terminus of beta-strand 1; motif 6 spans the 
N-terminus of strand 2; motif 7 encompasses the C-terminus of alpha-helix 1 
and the N-terminus of strand 4; motif 8 spans strand 6 and the N-terminus 
of strand 7; and motif 9 encodes the C-terminus of strand 10. Two iterations 
on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 6 sequences was identified.
