PACAPRECEPTR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that   
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-   
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the   
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct   
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,   
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in   
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like   
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating   
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.       

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid   
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-   
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a manner
reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to interact with
G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been proposed to
account for this, there is no significant sequence identity between these
families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own unique '7TM'
signature.      

Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) has a wide physiological profile.
In the periphery, it induces relaxation in smooth muscle; inhibits
secretion in certain tissues, but stimulates secretion in others; and
modulates activity of cells in the immune system [6]. In the CNS, it has a
range of both excitatory and inhibitory actions. VIP receptors are
distributed widely in the periphery, and occur throughout the gastro-
intestinal tract and genitourinary system, other smooth muscles and
secretory glands. In the CNS, they are found abundantly in, e.g. the cortex,
hippocampus and thalamus [6]. All VIP receptors activate adenylyl cyclase.

There are two structurally distinct receptors that recognise pituitary
adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) and VIP peptides with
similar affinities (PACAP/VIPR-1, PACAP/VIPR-2), as well as a specific
receptor for the PACAP peptide (PACAP-1) [7]. PACAP type I receptors are
present in the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary, where they regulate the 
release of adrenocorticotropin, luteinising hormone, growth hormone and
prolactin, and in the adrenal medulla, where they regulate the release of
epinephrine [8]. The receptors are also found in high concentrations in 
testicular germ cells, where they may regulate spermatogenesis, and in some
transformed cell lines, such as the rat pancreatic acinar carcinoma cell
AR4-2J [8].

PACAPRECEPTR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide receptors. The 
fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs
were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length,
focusing on those areas that characterise the type 1 PACAP receptors but
distinguish them from the rest of the VIP receptor family - motifs 1-5 lie
in the N-terminal region immediately preceding TM domain 1; motif 6 lies in
the loop between TM domains 2 and 3; motif 7 spans the loop between TM
domains 6 and 7; and motifs 8-10 reside at the C-terminus. A single
iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches
were found: O73769 is a goldfish PACAP type 1 receptor that matches motifs
6-10; and VIPR_CARAU is a goldfish type 1 VIP receptor that matches motifs
7 and 9.
