VDCCGAMMA2
Voltage-dependent calcium channels are a diverse family of proteins that 
encompass a variety of biological functions, including presynaptic
neurotransmitter release and protein signalling within the cell [1,2]. The
high voltage-activated channels (L-, N-, P-, Q- and R-type channels)
comprise the alpha-1 subunit, which creates the pore for the import of 
extracellular calcium ions [2]. The activity of this pore is modulated by 
four tightly-coupled subunits: an intracellular beta subunit; a
transmembrane (TM) gamma subunit; and a disulphide-linked complex of alpha-2
and delta subunits, which are proteolytically cleaved from the same gene 
product [3,4].

The voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma (VDCCG) subunit family consists 
of at least 8 members, which share a number of common structural features 
[5]. Each member is predicted to possess four TM domains, with intracellular
N- and C- termini. The first extracellular loop contains a highly conserved
N-glycosylation site and a pair of conserved cysteine residues. The 
C-terminal seven residues of VDCCG-2, -3, -4 and -8 are also conserved and 
contain a consensus site for phosphorylation by cAMP and cGMP-dependent
protein kinases, and a target site for binding by PDZ domain proteins [5].

The VDCCG-2 subunit (also known as stargazin) was isolated by identifying 
the locus of the genetic disruption in the epileptic mouse mutant line
known as stargazer [6]. VDCCG-2 subunits are brain specific and enriched in
synaptic plasma membranes. In vitro studies using recombinant P/Q-type 
calcium channels show that VDCCG-2 subunit expression increases steady-state
channel inactivation, leading to the suggestion that, in stargazer mutants, 
inappropriate calcium entry may contribute to the seizure phenotype [6].

VDCCG-2 subunits are also implicated in cellular trafficking. They interact 
with ionotropic glutamate AMPA receptor subunits, a process that has been
shown to be essential in delivering functional AMPA receptors to the surface
membranes of cerebellar granule cells [7]. In addition, VDCCG-2 subunits
are capable of associating with PDZ proteins, such as PSD-95, through their 
C-terminal PDZ binding domains. This interaction is required to target AMPA
receptors to cerebellar synapses [7].

VDCCGAMMA2 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
voltage-dependent calcium channel gamma-2 subunit proteins. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions in the C-terminal portion of the alignment, focusing
on those sections that characterise the VDCCG-2 subunits but distinguish 
them from other family members - motifs 1, 2 and 3 all lie within the C-
terminal cytoplasmic tail region. A single iteration on SPTR39.22_17.3f was
required to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond 
the starting set.
