KV31CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].
 
Structurally, Kv channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-
gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and
3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+
channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif
that resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane spanning helices, and
forms the K+-selective pore domain [1-2].

The Kv family can be divided into 4 subfamilies on the basis of sequence
similarity and function: Shaker (Kv1), Shab (Kv2), Shaw (Kv3) and Shal 
(Kv4). All consist of pore-forming alpha subunits that associate with 
different types of beta subunit. To form a functional K+ channel pore,
4 alpha subunits and 4 beta subunits are required. The alpha subunits
have 6 well-conserved TM domains, a pore loop region and variable length
N- and C-termini. TM domains 5 and 6, and the loop region, form the K+ 
channel pore through which the K+ ions pass [3]. 

The shaw gene was first isolated from Drosophila. Several vertebrate K+
channels with similar amino acid sequences were subsequently found and,
together with the Drosophila Shaw channel, now constitute the Shaw (Kv3)
family. These channels are thought to play a role in shortening of action
potential durations and modulating pre-synaptic neurotransmitter release.
In mammals, the family consists of 4 genes (Kv3.1, Kv3.2, Kv3.3 and Kv3.4).
Each gene product has its own subcellular location and function [4].

Kv3.1 channels have slow-rising delayed rectifier-type outward currents that
inactivate slowly. They have a tentative role in the fast action potential
repolarisation abundant in rapidly firing neurons, such as the auditory
brainstem, and hippocampal and cortical interneurons [4]. There are two 
forms, -a and -b, which differ in expression during development. Kv3.1a
appears to be found in the neurons of the adult brain, whereas Kv3.1b is
expressed in embryonic and perinatal neurons. In addition, Kv3.1 channels
can also be found in T-lymphocytes [4].  

KV31CHANNEL is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kv3.1 voltage-gated K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length - motif 1 is situated in the N-terminus;
motifs 2 and 3 lie in the loop between the first and second putative TM 
domains; and motif 4 is located in the C-terminus. A single iteration on
SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences
being identified beyond the starting set. Several partial matches were
found, all of which are members of the Kv3.1 channel family or are
closely related K+ channels that fail to make significant matches with
one or more motifs.
