INTERFERONGR
Interferon (INF)-gamma is a dimeric glycoprotein produced by activated T 
cells and natural killer cells. Although originally isolated based on its
antiviral activity, INF-gamma also displays powerful anti-proliferative and
immuno-modulatory activities, which are essential for developing appropriate 
cellular defenses against a variety of infectious agents. The first step in 
eliciting these responses is the specific high affinity interaction of INF-
gamma with its cell-surface receptor (INF-gammaRalpha); the complex then
interacts with at least one of a family of additional species-specific 
accessory factors (AF-1 or INF-gammabeta), which convey different cellular 
responses. One such response is the association and phosphorylation of two 
protein tyrosine kinases (Jak-1 and Jak-2), which in turn stimulate nuclear 
transcription activators [1]. 

The human INF-gammaR, is a member of the hematopoietic cytokine receptor 
superfamily. It is expressed in a membrane-bound form in many cell types,
and is over-expressed in tumour cells. It comprises an extracellular portion 
of 229 residues, a single transmembrane region, and a cytoplasmic domain of 
221 residues. As with other members of its superfamily, the cytokine-binding
sites are formed by a small set of closely-spaced surface loops that extend 
from a beta-sheet core, much like antigen-binding sites on antibodies. The 
extracellular INF-gammaR monomer comprises two domains (domain D1 from 
residue 14-102, and domain D2 from residue 114-221), each resembling an Ig 
fold with fibronectin type III topology [2].

INGRECEPTOR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
interferon-gamma receptor alpha chains. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 includes
beta-strand 6 in the putative extracellular domain; and motifs 2-5 span the 
cytoplasmic domain. A single iteration on SPTR39_17f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.  
