P2X1RECEPTOR
P2X purinoceptors are cell membrane ion channels, gated by adenosine
5'-triphosphate (ATP) and other nucleotides. They have been found to be
widely expressed on mammalian cells, and, by means of their functional 
properties, can be differentiated into three sub-groups. The first group is
almost equally well activated by ATP and its analogue alphabetamethyleneATP,
whereas, the second group is not activated by the latter compound. A third
type of receptor (also called P2Z) is distinguished by the fact that
repeated or prolonged agonist application leads to the opening of much
larger pores, allowing large molecules to traverse the cell membrane. This
increased permeability rapidly leads to cell death, and lysis.

Molecular cloning studies have identified seven P2X receptor subtypes,
designated P2X1-P2X7. These receptors are proteins that share 35-48% amino
acid identity, and possess two putative transmembrane (TM) domains,
separated by a long (~270 residues) intervening sequence, which is
thought to form an extracellular loop. Around 1/4 of the residues within
the loop are invariant between the cloned subtypes, including 10
characteristic cysteines.

Studies of the functional properties of heterologously expressed P2X
receptors, together with the examination of their distribution in native
tissues, suggests they likely occur as both homo- and heteromultimers
in vivo [1,2].

Expression of P2X1 receptors produces receptors that are equally well
activated by alphabetamethyleneATP and ATP. The properties of the currents
so generated are quite comparable to those determined for native P2X
receptors, such as those found to be present in smooth muscle [2].

P2X1RECEPTOR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
P2X purinoceptor isoform 1. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the P2X purinoceptor isoform 1 but distinguish it from
others - motif 1 resides within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; motifs
2-7 lie within the exoplasmic loop connecting the two putative TM domains; 
motif 8 spans the end of the exoplasmic loop, and the start of the
cytoplasmic C-terminus; and motifs 9-10 encode portions of the cytoplasmic
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
