AUTOINDCRSYN
Bacterial species have many methods of controlling gene expression and cell
growth. Regulation of gene expression in response to changes in cell density
is termed quorum sensing [1,2]. Quorum-sensing bacteria produce, release and
respond to hormone-like molecules (autoinducers) that accumulate in the 
external environment as the cell population grows. Once a threshold of these
molecules is reached, a signal transduction cascade is triggered that 
ultimately leads to behavioural changes in the bacterium [2]. Autoinducers
are thus clearly important mediators of molecular communication. 

Conjugal transfer of Agrobacterium octopine-type Ti plasmids is activated 
by octopine, a metabolite released from plant tumours [3]. Octopine causes 
conjugal donors to secrete a pheromone, Agrobacterium autoinducer (AAI),
and exogenous AAI further stimulates conjugation [3]. The putative AAI 
synthase and an AAI-responsive transcriptional regulator have been found 
to be encoded by the Ti plasmid traI and traR genes, respectively [3]. TraR
and TraI are similar to the LuxR and LuxI regulatory proteins of Vibrio
fischeri, and AAI is similar in structure to the diffusable V.fischeri
autoinducer, the inducing ligand of LuxR [3]. TraR activates target genes
in the presence of AAI and also activates traR and traI themselves, creating
two positive-feedback loops [3]. TraR-AAI-mediated activation in wild-type
Agrobacterium strains is enhanced by culturing on solid media, suggesting a
possible role in cell density sensing [3]. 

Production of light by the marine bacterium Vibrio fischeri and by
recombinant hosts containing cloned lux genes is controlled by the density
of the culture [4]. Density-dependent regulation of lux gene expression has
been shown to require a locus consisting of the luxR and luxI genes [4].

In these and other Gram-negative bacteria, N-(3-oxohexanoyl)-L-homoserine 
lactone (OHHL) acts as the autoinducer by binding to transcriptional
regulatory proteins and activating them [5,6]. OHHL and related molecules,
such as N-butanoyl- (BHL), N-hexanoyl- (HHL) and N-oxododecanoyl- (PAI) 
homoserine lactones, are produced by a family of proteins that share a high
level of sequence similarity.

AUTOINDCRSYN is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
autoinducer synthesis proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length. Two iterations on SPTR39_15f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 30
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of
which are autoinducer synthesis proteins that fail to make significant
matches with one or more motifs.
