TASKCHANNEL
Potassium (K+) channels play a key role in many cellular functions, in both
excitable and non-excitable tissues. Among the ion channels, they form the
largest family in terms of both structure and function. K+ channel subunits
contain a conserved pore-forming motif, the P-domain, which is considered to
be an essential element of the aqueous K+-selective pore. Shaker-type and
Kir K+ channel subunits both contain a single P-domain, and four such
subunits are thought to associate to form a multimer, together with 
associated auxillary (regulatory) subunits. Recently, a new class of K+ 
channel subunits was cloned, which is clearly distinct from the Shaker and
Kir families; the new class contains not one but two P-domains in each 
subunit, and evidence suggests a complete channel may be formed by the 
dimerisation of two such subunits.

The first member of this family (TOK1) cloned from S.cerevisiae [1] was
predicted to have eight potential transmembrane (TM) helices. However,
subsequently-cloned two P-domain family members from Drosophila and
mammalian species are predicted to have only four TM segments. They are
usually referred to as TWIK-related channels (Tandem of P-domains in a 
Weakly Inward rectifying K+ channel) [2-6]. Functional characterisation of
these channels has revealed a diversity of properties in that they may show 
inward or outward rectification, their activity may be modulated in 
different directions by protein phosphorylation, and their sensitivity to
changes in intracellular or extracellular pH varies. Despite these disparate
properties, they are all thought to share the same topology of four TM 
segments, including two P-domains. That TWIK-related K+ channels all produce
instantaneous and non-inactivating K+ currents, which do not display a
voltage-dependent activation threshold, suggests that they are background 
(leak) K+ channels involved in the generation and modulation of the resting
membrane potential in various cell types. Further studies have revealed that
they may be found in many species, including: plants, invertebrates and 
mammals.

The TASK (TWIK-related acid-sensitive K+ channel) family contains five
members (TASK1-5), which share no more than 54% amino acid identity. These
form functional K+ channels in various cell types and encode background
K+ channels, thereby helping to set the resting membrane potential. All
members are very sensitive to variations in extracellular pH in the
physiological range, changing from fully-open to closed in approximately
0.5pH units around pH7.4. Thus, they may well constitute biological sensors
of external pH variations [7].

TASKCHANNEL is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
TASK K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise
TASK channel proteins but distinguish them from related two P-domain K+
channel sequences - motif 1 is situated in the N-terminus; motif 2 spans 
the second putative TM domain; and motif 3 is located in the fourth TM
domain. Three iterations on SPTR39.22_17.3f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 16 sequences was
identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of which are
members of the TASK family.

An update on SPTR55_38f identified a true set comprising 41 sequences, 
together with 4 partial matches.
