MCHRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.
   
The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide originally
identified in teleost fish [6,7]. In fish, MCH is released from the
pituitary and causes lightening of skin pigment cells through pigment
aggregation [6,8]. In mammals, MCH is predominantly expressed in the
hypothalamus, and functions as a neurotransmitter in the control of a range
of functions [8]. A major role of MCH is thought to be in the regulation of
feeding: injection of MCH into rat brains stimulates feeding; expression of
MCH is upregulated in the hypothalamus of obese and fasting mice; and mice
lacking MCH are lean and eat less [6]. MCH and alpha melanocyte-stimulating
hormone (alpha-MSH) have antagonistic effects on a number of physiological
functions. Alpha-MSH darkens pigmentation in fish and reduces feeding in
mammals, whereas MCH increases feeding [6,8].

Two G protein-coupled receptors, MCH1 and MCH2, have recently been
identified as receptors for the melanin-concentrating hormone.

MCHRECEPTOR is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
melanin-concentrating hormone receptor family. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved sections within loop and TM regions, focusing on those areas of
the alignment that characterise the MCH receptors but distinguish them from
the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 lies in the N-terminal
portion of TM domain 1; motifs 2 and 3 span the N- and C-terminal portions
of TM domain 2, respectively; motif 4 is located in the first external loop;
motif 5 encodes the C-terminal portion of TM domain 4, leading into the
second external loop; motif 6 spans part of the second external loop,
leading into TM domain 5; and motif 7 encodes the C-terminal portion of TM
domain 6 and part of the third external loop. A single iteration on
SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.
