TYPE3OMOPROT
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[2] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [3]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [3], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

One of the outer membrane protein subunit families, termed "O" here for
nomenclature purposes, aids in the structural assembly of the invasion 
complex [4]. It is essential for the secretion of the Sip toxins in 
Salmonella and Shigella (SspaO gene) [1]. Members of this family also 
include YscQ protein (Yersinia), and the plant enteropathogen gene Y4YK 
(Rhizobium). The flagellar protein FliN also shares partial similarity, 
probably due to evolution of the type III secretion system from the 
flagellar biosynthetic pathway.

TYPE3OMOPROT is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type III secretion system outer membrane O protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~290 amino acids).
Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which 
point a true set of 20 sequences was identified. Three partial matches were
also found, all of which are flagellar "switch" biosynthetic FliN proteins
that match motifs 3 and 4.
