ASYNUCLEIN
Human synuclein has been shown to belong to a gene family [1]. To date, 
three different proteins, termed alpha, beta and gamma, have been 
characterised. The amino acid sequences of synucleins share a similar
overall structure: hydropathy analysis reveals a central hydrophobic domain
of ~30 amino acids, flanked by highly hydrophilic stretches; the N-terminal
flanking region contains four repeating motifs (EKTKEGV); and the C-terminal
domain is rich in glutamic acid and proline [2]

Synelfin, a homologue of synuclein, is a soluble presynaptic protein that 
is predicted to form an amphipathic alpha-helical structure typical of the
lipid-binding domain in apolipoproteins [3]. This protein is believed to
serve a novel function critical to the regulation of vertebrate neural
plasticity [3]. 

Alpha-synuclein has been found to be mutated in several families with 
autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD) [1]. A peptide of the alpha-
synuclein protein was previously characterised as a major component of 
amyloid plaques in brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. The 
mechanism by which this presynaptic protein is involved in the two most
common neurodegenerative disorders, AD and PD, remains unclear [1]. 

ASYNUCLEIN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
alpha-synucleins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise the alpha-synucleins but distinguish them from the rest of the
synuclein family - motif 1 encodes a short sequence that precedes the final
EKT repeat; motif 2 lies at the C-terminus of the hydrophobic domain; and
motifs 3 and 4 lie in the C-terminal Glu-Pro-rich domain. Two iterations on 
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 4 sequences was identified. A single partial match was found,
SYU2_RAT, a form 2 alpha-synuclein that fails to match motifs 3 and 4. 
