KV16CHANNEL
Potassium ion (K+) channels are a structurally diverse group of proteins
that facilitate the flow of K+ ions across cell membranes. They are
ubiquitous, being present in virtually all cell types. Activation of K+
channels tends to hyperpolarise cells, reducing the membrane's electrical
resistance, dampening nervous activity. In eukaryotic cells, K+ channels
are involved in neural signalling and generation of the cardiac rhythm, and
act as effectors in signal transduction pathways involving G protein-
coupled receptors (GPCRs). In prokaryotic cells, they play a role in the
maintenance of ionic homeostasis [1].
    
Structurally, Kv channels belong to the subfamily of K+ channels whose
subunits contain 6 transmembrane (TM) domains: these are the voltage-
gated K+ (Kv) channels, the KCNQ channels, the EAG-like K+ channels and
3 kinds of Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BK, IK and SK) [2]. All K+
channels share a characteristic sequence feature: a TMxTVGYG motif
that resides between the 2 C-terminal membrane spanning helices, and
forms the K+-selective pore domain [1-2].
   
The Kv family can be divided into 4 subfamilies on the basis of sequence
similarity and function: Shaker (Kv1), Shab (Kv2), Shaw (Kv3) and Shal 
(Kv4). All consist of pore-forming alpha subunits that associate with 
different types of beta subunit. To form a functional K+ channel pore,
4 alpha subunits and 4 beta subunits are required. The alpha subunits
have 6 well-conserved TM domains, a pore loop region and variable length
N- and C-termini. TM domains 5 and 6, and the loop region, form the K+ 
channel pore through which the K+ ions pass [3].
   
The first Shaker (Kv1) sequence was found in Drosophila. Several vertebrate
K+ channels with similar amino acid sequences were subsequently found and,
together with the Drosophila Shaker channel, now constitute the Shaker (Kv1) 
family. These channels are mostly expressed in the brain, but can also be
found in non-excitable cells, such as lymphocytes [4,5].  

Kv1.6 is expressed in the heart, smooth muscle cells and brain, especially
the midbrain areas and brainstem. The kv1.6 alpha-subunits can also
coassemble with other Shaker alpha subunits, for example, with kv1.5 to
form heteromultimeric K+ channels [5].

KV16CHANNEL is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kv1.6 voltage-gated potassium channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motifs 1-5 reside at
the N-terminus; motifs 6-8 lie between the first and second putative TM 
domains; and motifs 9 and 10 reside at the C-terminus. A single iteration
on SPTR39_15f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being 
identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches were found,
both of which are members of the Shaker family that match 2 motifs.
