EXPANSNFAMLY
Expansins are unusual proteins that mediate cell wall extension in plants
[1]. They are believed to act as a sort of chemical grease, allowing
polymers to slide past one another by disrupting non-covalent hydrogen
bonds that hold many wall polymers to one another. This process is not
degradative and hence does not weaken the wall, which could otherwise
rupture under internal pressure during growth.

Sequence comparisons indicate at least four distinct expansin cDNAs in
rice and at least six in Arabidopsis. The proteins are highly conserved in
size and sequence (75-95% amino acid sequence similarity between any 
pairwise comparison), and phylogenetic trees indicate that this multigene
family formed before the evolutionary divergence of monocotyledons and 
dicotyledons [1]. Sequence and motif analyses show no similarities to known
functional domains that might account for expansin action on wall extension
[1]. It is thought that several highly-conserved tryptophans may function 
in expansin binding to cellulose, or other glycans. The high conservation 
of the family indicates that the mechanism by which expansins promote wall
extensin tolerates little variation in protein structure. 

Grass pollens, such as pollen from timothy grass, represent a major cause
of type I allergy [2]. Interestingly, expansins share a high degree of
sequence similarity with the Lol p I family of allergens.

EXPANSNFAMLY is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
expansin/Lol p I family of proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an 
initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 5 includes the
conserved tryptophans thought to mediate binding to cellulose. Three 
iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point 
a true set comprising 40 sequences was identified. Several partial matches 
were also found, all of which are related sequences that fail to match one 
or more motifs.
