APYRASEFAMLY
Many pathogens are transmitted by arthropod vectors to vertebrate hosts
through salivary secretions that occur while the vectors are feeding on
blood. Since hematophagy has arisen independently several times in insects,
a large variety of different molecules have evolved to accomplish the same
or similar function.

When vascular tissue is damaged, the disrupted cells release ATP and ADP at
high concentration into the extracellular environment, where ADP promotes
platelet activation and aggregation. The activated platelets may in turn 
release in the medium their ADP-containing granules, recruiting additional
platelets to the site of injury. One of the ADP-platelet dependent anti-
aggregation components, required for efficient feeding, is an apyrase with 
ATP-diphosphohydrolase activity [1]. Apyrase acts as an allergen, and its 
function is to inhibit the ADP-induced platelet recruitment and aggregation
by hydrolysing ADP to AMP and inorganic phosphate: 

		ATP + 2H2O = AMP + 2PHOSPHATE

In addition, levels of apyrase activity correlate positively with decreased
probing time during feeding, leading investigators to suggest that the
enzyme facilitates the speed of locating blood.

The gene Apyrase is expressed specifically in the adult female salivary
glands of the mosquito A.aegypti. Expression of this gene is confined to
those lobes of the salivary glands that secrete female-enriched products.
Apyrase protein levels increase after adult emergence, and are not affected
greatly by bloodfeeding [1]. In animals, Apyrase has been found in the
bovine aorta, rat uterus and mammary glands, and human placenta. The enzyme
has been implicated as an inhibitor of platelet aggregation [1]. 

Sequence comparisons indicate similarities with a ubiquitous family of
5'-nucleotidases. However, the mosquito protein differs from other members
of the family in lacking a C-terminal hydrophobic domain. This is consistent
with the fact that mosquito apyrase is a secreted salivary protein [2]. 

The observation that apyrase is similar to 5'-nucleotidase extends earlier
suggestions that the evolutionary history of the nucleotidase family has
been characterised by substrate specification. An example of the ancestral
state is represented by a bacterial enzyme that combines 5'-nucleotidase,
UDP-sugar hydrolase, and apyrase activities, including an identical region
of 6 amino acid residues, GKYVGR. Accordingly, it has been proposed that
duplications of the broad substrate spectrum ancestral gene were followed 
by divergent selection to produce apyrases, 5'-nucleotidases and UDP-sugar 
hydrolases. It is possible that a gene for a single enzyme such as the 
5'-nucleotidase is the common progenitor for salivary apyrases in the 
various arthropod taxa. The apparent conversion of a gene encoding an 
enzyme involved in a common metabolic event at the cellular level to a gene
involved in the anti-haemostatic response, illustrates one way that this
particular insect has adapted to the challenges of bloodfeeding [2,3].

The crystal structure of 5'-nucleotidase from E.coli has been determined 
to 1.7A resolution [4]. The structure sequesters two zinc ions within a 
cleft between two domains, so forming the active site. The dimetal center
and a catalytic Asp-His dyad are the principal components of the catalytic
mechanism [4]. Structure-based sequence comparisons indicate that this
structure provides a model for animal 5'-nucleotidases and related proteins. 

APYRASEFAMLY is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
apyrase family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 16
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motif 1 encompasses beta-strand 1; motif 2 spans
strand 10 and alpha-helix 7; motif 3 spans the C-terminus of helix 8 and
strands 11 and 12; motif 4 encodes strands 15 and 16; motif 5 encompasses
strands 20 and 21, and helix 13; and motif 6 spans strand 26 and helix 15.
Six iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 51 sequences was identified. Several partial 
matches were also found, all of which are family members that fail to make
significant matches with one or more motifs.
