CXCCHMKINER6
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Chemokines are proteins that have important physiological and patho-
physiological roles in a wide range of acute and chronic inflammatory
processes [6]. Their sequences are similar and are characterised by a
4-cysteine motif: the family can be divided according to whether the first 2
Cys residues are adjacent (the C-C family), or separated by an intervening
residue (the C-x-C family).

A novel chemokine, CXCL16, has been identified that is a member of the C-X-C
family [8,9]. Despite possessing the CXC motif, however, it is distantly
related to the other family members and has greatest sequence similarity to
members of the C-C family [9]. CXCL16 also differs in structure from the
other family members (all of which are secreted proteins) and contains a
TM domain linked to the chemokine domain by a heavily glycosylated mucin
stalk. This structure is similar to that of the CX3C chemokine fractalkine,
the only other known chemokine with a TM domain [9]. CXCL16 has been found 
to be expressed in the spleen, lymph nodes, Peyer's patches and thymus. In
non-lymphoid tissues, CXCL16 is found in the lung, small intestine, kidney,
heart and liver [8]. The chemokine appears to be expressed as a membrane-
bound cell surface ligand on antigen presenting cells (APCs), such as 
B cells and macrophages [9]. CXCL16 can also be shed from the cell surface
in an active, soluble form [8,9]. These two forms may have different
functions. Expression of CXCL16 is upregulated by exposure to inflammatory
stimuli [8].

The receptor for CXCL16 has been identified as an orphan receptor, Bonzo,
which has now been renamed CXCR6 [8]. CXCL16 does not activate any other
known chemokine receptor, making this pairing highly specific [9]. CXCR6 is
expressed in lymphoid tissues and activated T cells and is induced in
peripheral blood leukocytes [7]. It has also been found on natural killer
cells [8]. Binding of CXCL16 to CXCR6 causes chemotactic migration in
activated T cells. This chemotactic response is sensitive to pertussis toxin
and CXCL16 also results in calcium mobilisation, suggesting coupling to a
Gi/o protein [8]. A number of roles have been suggested for CXCR6. Subset-
specific immune responses may be regulated by cell-cell contacts between 
activated subsets of T cells (expressing CXCR6) and APCs (expressing
CXCL16). CXCR6 may also be involved in cell-cell contacts during chronic
inflammation [9]. Additional roles for the receptor include T cell migration
in the splenic red pulp, thymocyte development and effector T cell
trafficking [8]. CXCR6 also acts as a coreceptor for T cell line-tropic and
macrophage-tropic HIV-1 strains, and may play a role in the establishment
and progression of HIV infection [7].

CXCCHMKINER6 is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type 6 C-X-C chemokine receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions 
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the type 6 C-X-C chemokine receptors but distinguish them from 
the rest of the chemokine receptor family - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the 
N-terminus; motif 3 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 4 lies in the 
second external loop; motif 5 spans the third cytoplasmic loop, leading into 
TM domain 6; motifs 6 and 7 span the third external loop, leading into TM 
domain 7; and motifs 8 and 9 reside at the C-terminus. Two iterations on 
SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 6 sequences was identified.
