NRPEPTIDEY2R
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is one of the most abundant peptides in mammalian
brain, inducing a variety of behavioural effects (e.g., stimulation of food
intake, anxiety, facilitation of learning and memory, and regulation of the
cardiovascular and neuroendocrine systems) [6]. In the periphery, NPY 
stimulates vascular smooth muscle contraction and modulates hormone
secretion. NPY has been implicated in the pathophysiology of hypertension, 
congestive heart failure, affective disorders and appetite regulation [6].

Several pharmacologically distinct neuropeptide Y receptors have been 
characterised, designated NPY Y1-Y6. High densities of Y2 receptors are 
present in rat hippocampus and are also found in high levels in superficial
layers of cortex, certain thalamic nuclei, lateral septum, and anterior 
olfactory nuclei; lower levels are found in striatum [6]. The receptors are
found in high levels in smooth muscle (e.g., vas deferens and intestine), 
kidney proximal tubules and in cell lines [6]. They are believed to have a
predominantly presynaptic location, and are involved in inhibition of
adenylyl cyclase and voltage dependent calcium channels via a pertussis-
toxin-sensitive G protein, probably of the G0/Gi class [6]. 

NRPEPTIDEY2R is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
neuropeptide Y2 receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
within either loop or TM regions, focusing on those areas of the alignment
that characterise the Y2 receptors but distinguish them from the rest of
the neuropeptide Y family - motifs 1-3 span the N-terminus, leading into
TM domain 1; motifs 4 and 5 span the C-terminus of TM domain 4 and the 
second external loop; motifs 6 and 7 span the C-terminus of TM domain 5 
and the third cytoplasmic loop; motif 8 spans the C-terminus of TM domain 6 
and the third external loop; and motifs 9-11 reside at the C-terminus. Two 
iterations on OWL30.2 were required to reach convergence, at which point 
a true set comprising 5 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were 
also found: OAU83458 is an ovine neuropeptide Y2 receptor fragment that 
matches motifs 4-6; and AF054870 is a rat neuropeptide Y2 receptor fragment
that matches motifs 5 and 6.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 4 sequences.
