TYPE3IMPPROT
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[2] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [3]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [3], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

It is believed that the family of type III inner membrane proteins are 
used as structural moieties in a complex with several other subunits [4], 
including the ATPase necessary for driving the secretion system. One such
set of inner membrane proteins, termed "P" here for nomenclature purposes,
includes the Salmonella and Shigella SpaP, the Yersinia YscR, the Erwinia 
HrcR, and the Xanthamonas Pro2 genes [4], as well as several FliP flagellar 
biosynthesis genes [3]. FliP is an ~30kDa protein containing three or four
transmembrane (TM) regions.

TYPE3IMPPROT is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type III secretion system inner membrane P protein family. The fingerprint
was derived from an initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning the full alignment length (~260 amino acids)
- motif 1 includes the first putative TM region; motif 3 spans TM domain 2;
motifs 4 and 5 span TM domain 3; and motif 6 includes the C-terminal portion
of TM domain 4. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 35 sequences was 
identified.
