PRESENILIN2
Presenilins are polytopic transmembrane (TM) proteins, mutations in which 
are associated with the occurrence of early-onset familial Alzheimer's 
disease, a rare form of the disease that results from a single-gene
mutation [1,2]. While the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease is unresolved,
all forms are typified by a global cognitive decline and the occurrence of  
characteristic neuropathological changes. Invariably, post-mortem brains
from Alzheimer's patients contain abundant neurofibrillary tangles, together
with depositions of beta-amyloid protein as senile plaques.

The physiological functions of presenilins are unknown, but they may be 
related to developmental signalling, apoptotic signal transduction, or
processing of selected proteins, such as the beta-amyloid precursor protein
(beta-APP). That presenilin homologues have been identified in species that
do not have an Alzhemier's disease correlate suggests that they may have 
functions unrelated to the disease, homologues having been identified in
mouse, Drosophila and C.elegans. In the latter, the sel-12 protein (a worm
homologue of the mammalian presenilins) has been demonstrated to facilitate
the function of the Notch receptor, which plays a role in cell-cell
signalling during cell differentiation in development. Intriguingly,
presenilin 1 is able to restore function in a C.elegans mutant lacking
sel-12, suggesting presenilin may also be involved in cell-cell signalling
in higher species.

In humans, there are two presenilin genes (PS1 and PS2), encoding proteins
of 467 and 448 amino acids respectively. They share 67% amino acid identity,
the greatest divergence between the two falling in the N-terminus and in the
large hydrophilic loop towards the C-terminal part of each molecule. Six to
nine TM domains are predicted for each, and biochemical analysis has
demonstrated that their C-termini are cytoplasmic; but the orientation of
their N-termini and large hydrophilic loops remains to be resolved. They
are expressed in almost all tissues, including the brain and, at a cellular
level, they have been localised to the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic
reticulum and Golgi apparatus. 

Presenilin 2 (unlike presenilin 1) has been found to have pro-apoptotic 
actions, which are enhanced by the mutations that have been characterised
in this protein; however, when compared to PS1 gene mutations, they are
thought to be responsible for only a small percentage of early-onset
familial Alzheimer's disease cases (ca. 1%) [3].

PRESENILIN2 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for type 2
presenilins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise
presenilin 2 but distinguish it from other isoforms - motifs 1 and 2 lie in
the putative N-terminal cytoplasmic region; and motifs 3 and 4 reside in the
putative cytoplasmic large hydrophilic loop. Two iterations on OWL31.1 were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8
sequences was identified.

An update on SPTR37_9f identified a true set of 6 sequences.
