WNTPROTEIN
Wnt proteins constitute a large family of secreted molecules that are
involved in intercellular signalling during development. The name derives
from the first 2 members of the family to be discovered: int-1 (mouse) and
wingless (Drosophila) [1]. It is now recognised that Wnt signalling controls
many cell fate decisions in a variety of different organisms, including
mammals [2]. Wnt signalling has been implicated in tumorigenesis, early
mesodermal patterning of the embryo, morphogenesis of the brain and kidney,
regulation of mammary gland proliferation, and Alzheimer's disease [3,4].

Wnt-mediated signalling is believed to proceed initially through binding to
cell surface receptors of the frizzled family; the signal is subsequently
transduced through several cytoplasmic components to B-catenin, which enters
the nucleus and activates the transcription of several genes important in
development [5]. More recently, however, several non-canonical Wnt
signalling pathways have been elucidated that act independently of
B-catenin [6]. Members of the Wnt gene family are defined by their sequence
similarity to mouse Wnt-1 and Wingless in Drosophila. They encode proteins
of ~350-400 residues in length, with orthologues identified in several,
mostly vertebrate, species. Very little is known about the structure of 
Wnts as they are notoriously insoluble; in terms of primary structure, the
family is characterised by a signal sequence and an almost invariant pattern
of 23-24 conserved cysteines [1]. Fifteen major Wnt gene families have been 
identified in vertebrates, with multiple subtypes within some classes.

WNTPROTEIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the Wnt
proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length. Three iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 69 sequences was
identified. A single partial match was also found, Q27886, a probable Wnt
protein from C.elegans that fails to make a significant match with motif 3. 

An update on SPTR40_20f identified a true set of 122 sequences. Two further
partial matches were also found: Q9VFX1, a putative Wnt protein from
Drosophila melanogaster; and Q9PSL1, a proposed Wnt protein fragment from 
Xenopus laevis. 
