PPNRPEPTIDEW
Two closely related neuropeptide precursors, which share no significant
sequence similarity with other known neuropeptides, have recently been
identified and named preproneuropeptide B and preproneuropeptide W [1-3]. In
humans, each precursor contains a signal sequence and two dibasic cleavage
sites. Alternative cleavage of these sites results in long (29 or 30 amino
acid) and short (23 amino acid) forms of the resultant neuropeptides [1,2].
Murine, rat and bovine versions of preproneuropeptide B, however, contain
only the second cleavage site, resulting in only the long form of 
neuropeptide B [2,3].

Neuropeptide W has a more limited distribution in the brain than
neuropeptide B and is found at highest levels in the substantial nigra,
suggesting an involvement in locomotor control [2]. In the periphery,
neuropeptide W is more widespread than neuropeptide B. Like neuropeptide B,
it is expressed at high levels in testis, ovary, uterus, placenta, spleen,
lymph nodes and peripheral blood leukocytes, indicating potential roles in
the reproductive and immune systems [2]. In addition, however, neuropeptide
W has been found at high levels in the liver, stomach and trachea [2].
Intracerebroventricular administration of neuropeptide W in rats has been
reported to produce an acute increase in food intake and to stimulate
prolactin release [1].

PPNRPEPTIDEW is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
neuropeptide W precursor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved sections
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those areas
that characterise neuropeptide W precursors but distinguish them from
closely related neuropeptide B precursors - motif 1 lies in the central
region encoding neuropeptide W; and motifs 2-4 span the C-terminal region.
A single iteration on SPTR40_22f was required to reach convergence, no
further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
