ORNDCRBXLASE
Pyridoxal-dependent decarboxylases that act on ornithine-, lysine-, 
arginine- and related substrates can be classified into different families
on the basis of sequence similarity [1,2]. One of these families includes:
eukaryotic ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), which catalyses the transformation
of ornithine into putrescine; prokaryotic diaminopimelic acid decarboxylase
(DAPDC), which catalyses the conversion of diaminopimelic acid into lysine,
the final step of lysine biosynthesis; Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci
protein, tabA, which is probably involved in tabtoxin biosynthesis and
is similar to DAPDC; and bacterial and plant biosynthetic arginine
decarboxylase (ADC), which catalyses the transformation of arginine 
into agmatine, the first step in putrescine synthesis from arginine.

Although these proteins, which are known collectively as group IV
decarboxylases [2], probably share a common evolutionary origin, their
levels of sequence similarity are low, being confined to a few short
conserved regions. 

Phylogenetic analysis of the mRNAs from several mammalian species suggests
that ODC is encoded by orthologous genes in the different species [3].
Analysis of divergence patterns in a number of subregions showed that the
domains have evolved in a noncoordinate fashion. Evolution of each subregion
has been episodic, with periods of both rapid and slow divergence, possibly
indicating the existence of selection pressures that were exerted in a 
time- and domain-specific manner during mammalian speciation [3].

The active form of mammalian ODC is a homodimer of 53kDa subunits (the 
monomer retains no enzymatic activity). In vitro hybridisation and cross-
linkage analysis have suggested that the active site of ODC is formed at 
the interface of the two monomers via the interaction of the cysteine-360-
containing region of one subunit with the lysine-69-containing region of 
the other [4]. 

ORNDCRBXLASE is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
ornithine decarboxylases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the ornithine decarboxylases but distinguish them from
the rest of the ODA family - motif 2 contains the region encoded by PROSITE 
pattern ODR_DC_2_1 (PS00878), which includes a conserved lysine residue that
is the pyridoxal-P attachment site in mouse ODC [5]. Five iterations on
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set
comprising 30 sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also
found, all of which are ornithine decarboxylases and homologues that fail
to match one or more motifs.
