KIR11CHANNEL
Potassium channels are found in virtually all cell types. Their pore-
forming subunits fall into three structural families, i.e. those possessing
six, four and two transmembrane (TM) domains. The six-TM domain K+ channels
can be further subdivided into six families: the voltage-gated K+ channels
(Kv), the KCNQ channels, the eag-like K+ channels, and three Ca2+-activated
K+ channels. Inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir) are the principal class
of two-TM domain K+ channels, and the recently-discovered two-pore domain
K+ channels, make up a family of four-TM domain K+ channels.

Inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) are responsible for regulating
diverse processes including: cellular excitability, vascular tone, heart
rate, renal salt flow, and insulin release [1]. To date, around twenty
members of this superfamily have been cloned, which can be grouped into six
families by sequence similarity - these are designated Kir1.x-7.x [2,3].

Cloned Kir channel cDNAs encode proteins of between ~370-500 residues,
containing two predicted TM domains, with the characteristic K+ channel
pore-forming domain located between them. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be cytoplasmic, and the N-terminus lacks a signal sequence. It is thought
that four Kir subunits assemble to form a tetrameric channel complex, which
may be hetero- or homomeric [1].

Kir1.1 channels (also known as ROMK1-6 and KAB-1) are thought to underlie
K+ secretion in the kidney. Their activity is modulated by intracellular
pH, with acidosis inhibiting the channel. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be involved in this modulation. Mutations in Kir1.1 lead to Bartter's
syndrome type III, an inherited kidney disorder, which leads to salt-
wasting, hypokalaemia and metabolic acidosis. All of the mutations that
have been functionally characterised either abolish, or markedly reduce,
Kir1.1 K+ currents.

KIR11CHANNEL is a 7-element fingerprint thar provides a signature for the
Kir1.1 inward rectifier K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those 
sections that characterise Kir1.1 but distinguish it from other subtypes - 
motif 1 lies in the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; motif 2 spans the
C-terminal portion of the extracellular loop, and the start of the second
TM domain; and motifs 3-7 encode portions of the cytoplasmic C-terminus.
Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 3 sequences was identified.
