P2X6RECEPTOR
P2X purinoceptors are cell membrane ion channels, gated by adenosine
5'-triphosphate (ATP) and other nucleotides. They have been found to be
widely expressed on mammalian cells, and, by means of their functional 
properties, can be differentiated into three sub-groups. The first group is
almost equally well activated by ATP and its analogue alphabetamethyleneATP,
whereas, the second group is not activated by the latter compound. A third
type of receptor (also called P2Z) is distinguished by the fact that
repeated or prolonged agonist application leads to the opening of much
larger pores, allowing large molecules to traverse the cell membrane. This
increased permeability rapidly leads to cell death, and lysis.

Molecular cloning studies have identified seven P2X receptor subtypes,
designated P2X1-P2X7. These receptors are proteins that share 35-48% amino
acid identity, and possess two putative transmembrane (TM) domains,
separated by a long (~270 residues) intervening sequence, which is
thought to form an extracellular loop. Around 1/4 of the residues within
the loop are invariant between the cloned subtypes, including 10
characteristic cysteines.

Studies of the functional properties of heterologously expressed P2X
receptors, together with the examination of their distribution in native
tissues, suggests they likely occur as both homo- and heteromultimers
in vivo [1,2].

The P2X6 receptor (along with P2X2, P2X4 and P2X5) falls into a group of
receptors that are sensitive to ATP, but not alphabetamethyleneATP. There
is some evidence that P2X6 may heteropolymerise with P2X4, since they are
often found together in native tissues, and can be co-immunoprecipitated. 

P2X6RECEPTOR is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
P2X purinoceptor isoform 6. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise the P2X purinoceptor isoform 6 but distinguish it from
others - motifs 1-2 reside within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus;
motifs 3-6 lie within the exoplasmic loop connecting the two putative TM
domains; motif 7 lies in the centre of the second TM domain; and motifs
9-10 encode portions of the cytoplasmic C-terminus. A single iteration on
SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences being
identified beyond the starting set.
