KIR23CHANNEL
Potassium channels are found in virtually all cell types. Their pore-
forming subunits fall into three structural families, i.e. those possessing
six, four and two transmembrane (TM) domains. The six-TM domain K+ channels
can be further subdivided into six families: the voltage-gated K+ channels
(Kv), the KCNQ channels, the eag-like K+ channels, and three Ca2+-activated
K+ channels. Inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir) are the principal class
of two-TM domain K+ channels, and the recently-discovered two-pore domain
K+ channels, make up a family of four-TM domain K+ channels.

Inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) are responsible for regulating
diverse processes including: cellular excitability, vascular tone, heart
rate, renal salt flow, and insulin release [1]. To date, around twenty
members of this superfamily have been cloned, which can be grouped into six
families by sequence similarity - these are designated Kir1.x-7.x [2,3].

Cloned Kir channel cDNAs encode proteins of between ~370-500 residues,
containing two predicted TM domains, with the characteristic K+ channel
pore-forming domain located between them. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be cytoplasmic, and the N-terminus lacks a signal sequence. It is thought
that four Kir subunits assemble to form a tetrameric channel complex, which
may be hetero- or homomeric [1].

Kir2.3 it thought to play a role in the maintenance of membrane potential
in both neurones and myocardium. It is highly expressed in the forebrain,
and has a distinctly smaller ionic conductance than other Kir2.x family
members. By comparison with other Kir2.x channels, sequence analysis shows
it to have a larger putative extracellular loop (~15 more amino acid
residues) linking the first TM domain to the pore-forming (H5) domain, 
although the significance of this remains to be elucidated. Functional
studies have revealed Kir2.3 channel activity to be modulated by channel
phosphorylation, oxidation state, and changes in intracellular and
extracellular pH.

KIR23CHANNEL is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Kir2.3 inward rectifier K+ channel. The fingerprint was derived from an
intitial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise Kir2.3 but distinguish it from other subtypes -
motif 1 lies within the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus; motif 2 encodes
the C-terminal half of the second TM domain; and motifs 3-8 lie within the
putative cytoplasmic C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 5 sequences was
identified.
