TNFACTORR13C
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 13C is also known as B-cell activating factor (BAFF) receptor 
[7]. It appears to be the principal receptor in mediating BAFF-dependent 
B-cell signalling, and plays a critical role in late-stage B-cell maturation
and survival [8].

TNFACTORR13C is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 13C. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise TNF receptor 13C but distinguish it from other TNF 
receptor subtypes - motif 1 lies in the extracellular N-terminal region;
motif 2 spans part of the extracellular N-terminal region and part of the 
transmembrane domain; and motif 3 resides within the intracellular 
C-terminal region. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach 
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 8 sequences was 
identified.
