SECFTRNLCASE
Secretion across the inner membrane in some Gram-negative bacteria occurs 
via the preprotein translocase pathway. Proteins are produced in the 
cytoplasm as precursors, and require a chaperone subunit to direct them to 
the translocase component. [1]. From there, the mature proteins are either
targeted to the outer membrane, or remain as periplasmic proteins [1]. The 
translocase protein subunits are encoded on the bacterial chromosome. 

The translocase itself comprises 7 proteins, including a chaperone (SecB), 
ATPase (SecA), an integral membrane complex (SecY, SecE and SecG), and two 
additional membrane proteins that promote the release of the mature peptide 
into the periplasm (SecD and SecF) [1]. The latter stabilises the SecYEG 
complex in the membrane, as well as interacting with SecD in the periplasm
[2]. In Gram-positive microbes, the homologue of SecD and SecF is expressed 
as a SecDF fusion protein, and interacts directly with the SecB chaperone 
and SecYEG complex in the cell cytoplasm [3]. In both Gram-negative and 
-positive pathogens, the preprotein translocase is essential for virulence
[3].

Recently, the precise interactions between the E.coli SecYEG complex, 
SecD, SecF, and two other essential membrane proteins, YajC and YidC, have 
been researched [4]. Rather than acting individually, the four proteins form 
a heterotetrameric complex and associate with the SecYEG heterotrimeric 
complex [4]. The SecF and YajC subunits link the complex to the integral
membrane translocase. 

SECFTRNLCASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
bacterial translocase SecF protein family. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment (~220 amino acids)
- motif 1 lies in the loop following putative transmembrane (TM) domain 1;
motif 2 encodes the C-terminal residues of putative TM domain 2 and the
following loop; motif 3 encodes the C-terminal portion of TM domain 4; and
motif 4 includes the N-terminal residues of predicted TM domain 5. Four
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point 
a true set comprising 45 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were
also found, Q9WXE9 and SECF_BORBU, bacterial SecF homologues that fail
to match motifs 1 or 2.
