MAJORURINARY
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Rodent urinary proteins (mouse MUPs and rat alpha-2u globulins) are the  
major protein components of rodent urine and transport pheromones [5].
Rodent urine contains an unusually large amount of protein; this phenomenon 
has been studied extensively in both rats and mice. The major site of MUP
synthesis is the liver; the protein is secreted by the liver into serum, 
where it circulates at relatively low levels before being rapidly filtered
by the kidney and excreted. Expression of MUP mRNA is under different 
developmental and hormonal control in different tissues. However, 
constitutive expression of major urinary protein has been demonstrated in 
the salivary and lachrymal glands.

The sex-dependent expression of MUP (adult male mice secrete 5-20 times 
as much MUP as do females) and its ability to bind a number of odorant 
molecules is consistent with the suggestion that MUP acts as a pheromone
transporter; the protein may be excreted into the urine carrying a bound
pheromone, which is released as the urine dries and the protein denatures.
This proposal is strongly supported by the work of Bacchini and colleagues,
who have successfully purified MUP from mouse urine with bound ligands. They
identified three components from the total ligand extracted from the 
purified protein: the largest proportion (~70%) was 2-(s-butyl)thiazoline,
with 2,3-dehydroexobrevicomin and 4-(ethyl)phenol comprising minor fractions
of ~15% each. However, only ~40% of protein contained bound ligand. The
first two of these compounds are known to have pheromone activity in male
rat urine, eliciting many sexually related responses in female rats. A 
recent report has shown that MUP, acting via the vomeronasal organ after 
appropriate physical contact with male mouse urine in their environment, can
accelerate the onset of puberty in female mice. Interestingly, this seems to
be a function of the protein itself; MUP devoid of ligands, either by 
extraction or competitive displacement, is still active, while an organic 
extract containing these volatile ligands shows no activity. Moreover, a 
peptide corresponding to the N-terminus of MUP is also active, suggesting 
that MUP is not only a carrier of pheromones, but also a pheromone itself.
The crystal structure of MUP has been solved [5] and is known to be a 
member of the lipocalin family. 

Alpha-2u-globulin, a close homologue of MUP, accounts for 30-50% of total
excreted protein in adult male rat urine. As its electrophoretic mobility
is similar to that of serum a2 globulin, it was named 'alpha-2u-globulin',
the subscript 'u' denoting its origin in urine. Alpha-2u-globulin is 
secreted into the plasma by a number of tissues, where it circulates before
filtration through the kidney; between 20 and 50% is reabsorbed by the
proximal tubule of the nephron, the rest being excreted. Although the exact
physiological role of alpha-2u-globulin is unclear, there is circumstantial
evidence that it functions in pheromone transport. This is consistent with
its observed binding properties, its close similarity with MUP and the known
properties of male rat urine. For example, acute exposure to many important
industrial and environmental chemicals, including components of unleaded 
petrol, causes a toxic syndrome, known as a2u globulin nephropathy, in the
kidney of adult male rats. This syndrome is characterised by an excessive
accumulation, in proximal-tubule epithelial cells, of lysosomal protein
droplets composed of large amounts of alpha-2u-globulin, and the degeneration
and necrosis of cells lining the proximal tubule. Chronic exposure leads to
an escalating progression of symptoms, often resulting in kidney failure and
death. 

MAJORURINARY is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for rodent
urinary proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually
the full alignment length - motif 1 covers the N-terminal peptide and 310
helix; motif 2, which includes the region encoded by PROSITE pattern
LIPOCALIN (PS00213) and corresponds to the first LIPOCALIN fingerprint motif,
spans the first beta-strand; motif 3 spans the distal region of the large
loop L1 and strands 2 and 3; motif 4 covers strand 4 and the anterior region
of strand 5; motif 5, which spans the C-terminus of strand 6 and strand 7,
corresponds to the second motif of the LIPOCALIN fingerprint; motif 6, which
spans strand 8 and the N-terminus of the main C-terminal alpha-helix, is 
similar to the third LIPOCALIN motif; and motif 7 spans the C-terminal
peptide and includes the short beta-strand 9. Two iterations on SPRT37_10f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 11
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found, horse 
allergen 1 protein, which matches motifs 2, 4, 6 and 7.
