PROTEASEAR2
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Thrombin is a coagulation protease that activates platelets, leukocytes, 
endothelial and mesenchymal cells at sites of vascular injury, acting partly
through an unusual proteolytically activated GPCR [6]. Gene knockout 
experiments have provided definitive evidence for a second thrombin receptor
in mouse platelets and have suggested tissue-specific roles for different
thrombin receptors. Because the physiological agonist at the receptor was
originally unknown, it was provisionally named protease-activated receptor
(PAR) [7]. At least 4 PAR subtypes have now been characterised. Thus, the 
thrombin and PAR receptors constitute a fledgling receptor family that 
shares a novel proteolytic activation mechanism [8].

Human PAR-2 (hPAR-2) resides both on the plasma membrane and in the Golgi 
apparatus [9]. hPAR-2 mRNA is highly expressed in human pancreas, kidney,
colon, liver and small intestine, and by A549 lung and SW480 colon 
adenocarcinoma cells [9]. Hybridisation in situ reveals high expression in 
intestinal epithelial cells throughout the gut [9], where it is thought that
PAR-2 may serve as a trypsin sensor [9]. Its expression by cells and tissues
not normally exposed to pancreatic trypsin suggests that other proteases
could serve as physiological activators [9]. 

PROTEASEAR2 is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
protease activated receptor 2. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the PAR 2 receptor but distinguish it from closely related
members of the PAR family - motifs 1-3 reside at the N-terminus; motif 4
lies in the first external loop; motif 5 lies in the second cytoplasmic
loop, leading into TM domain 4; motif 6 lies in the second external loop,
leading into TM domain 5; motif 7 lies in the third cytoplasmic loop,
leading into TM domain 6; motif 8 lies in the third external loop, leading 
into TM domain 7; and motifs 9 and 10 reside at the C-terminus. A single
iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
