TNFACTORR13B
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 13B (also known as transmembrane activator and CAML interactor 
(TACI)) functions as a receptor for B-cell activating factor (BAFF) [7].
Mutations in TNF receptor 13B cause common variable immunodeficiency (CVID)
and IgA deficiency [8].

TNFACTORR13B is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 13B. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in
the N- and C-terminal thirds of the alignment, focusing on those sections 
that characterise TNF receptor 13B but distinguish it from other TNF 
receptor subtypes - motifs 1, 2 and 3 lie within the extracellular
N-terminal region, and motif 4 resides within the intracellular C-terminal
region. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified. Three partial 
matches were also found, B4E0B0_HUMAN, Q32LX4_HUMAN and B7Z6V8_HUMAN, all of
which are translated human sequences that fail to match the full complement
of motifs.
