INFPOTNTIATR
Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaire's disease, is a
facultative intracellular microbe that commonly infects human lung 
monocytes and macrophages and causes pneumonia [1]. It is water-borne and 
highly virulent, relying on several specific pathogenic factors to invade 
and infect the alveolar tissue. However, once grown to stationary phase in 
culture, the pathogen spontaneously converts to an avirulent state [1]. 

The major virulence factor expressed by Legionella pneumophila is the 
macrophage infectivity potentiator (Mip) [2]. Site-directed mutagenesis
studies of this protein in vitro severely impaired the intracellular
infection of human macrophages by L.pneumophila, causing it to lose
its potent antigenic activity [2]. Further studies into the enzymatic 
activity of Mip have revealed that it plays a similar role to eukaryotic
FK506-binding proteins. In vivo, it acts as a peptidyl-prolyl-cis/trans-
isomerase (PPIase) on oligopeptides [3], although it is unclear whether this
forms part of the virulence process. Substitution of Asp142 of the mature 
protein by Leu severely reduces the PPIase activity of Mip [4].

The structure of Mip has been resolved to 2.41A by X-ray crystallography [5],
revealing the virulence factor to exist as a homodimer. Each monomer 
consists of an N-terminal dimerisation module, a long central connecting
alpha-helix and a conserved PPIase domain at the C-terminus [5]. 

INFPOTNTIATR is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
macrophage infectivity potentiator proteins. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment (~80
amino acids) - motif 1 encodes the N-terminus of alpha-helix 1; motif 2 
spans the C-terminus of helix 1 and the N-terminus of helix 2; motif 3
encompasses the N-terminus of the long connecting alpha-helix 3; and motif
4 encodes the C-terminus of the same helix. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f 
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 41
sequences was identified.
