TYPE4SSCAGA 
Helicobacter pylori is a Gram-negative flagellated pathogen that causes   
gastric and peptic ulcers. In its chronic state, it can also contribute to 
gastric cancer development, through elicitation of a huge host inflammatory 
response [1]. It has been suggested that activated leukocytes may be 
responsible for tissue damage, and that phagocytes contribute to 
carcinogenesis. The Helicobacter genome contains several virulence factors;
clinical strains may be divided roughly into two types, depending on 
whether they contain the functional cag pathogenicity island. Type I strains 
can cause malignant disease, as they possess the active cag island and 
its associated exotoxin, CagA.

The bacterium makes use of a type IV secretion system similar in mechanism 
to the conjugation machine of Agrobacterium tumefaciens [2]. These machines
secrete three different types of substrate: DNA conjugation intermediates,
as in A.tumefaciens; multimeric proteins, such as the pertussis toxin of
Bordetella pertussis; and the CagA protein of H.pylori [3]. CagA has been
linked to the more severe forms of gastric ulcers and duodenal cancers [3].
Both CagA and the secretion system apparatus are encoded in the large
pathogenicity island, termed cag [3], possessed by the malignant disease-
causing type I bacterial strains.

The CagA exotoxin is encoded in the last portion of the island, and
mutants lacking the gene fail to induce IL-8 secretion, and to activate 
NF-kappa-B in vivo [4]. CagA is believed to have a similar function to 
EPEC type III secreted effectors; both are tyrosine-phosphorylated once 
translocated into the target cell [4], and allow engulfment by the host via
rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton.

TYPE4SSCAGA is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type IV secretion system CagA exotoxin family. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length (~1266 
amino acids). A single iteration on SPTR39_14f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
