TRPVRECEPTOR
Transient receptor potential (Trp) and related proteins are thought to be
Ca2+ ion channel subunits that mediate capacitative Ca2+ entry in response 
to a range of external and internal cell stimuli. Such Ca2+ entry is thought 
to be an essential component of cellular responses to many hormones and
growth factors, and acts to replenish intracellular Ca2+ stores that have
been emptied through the action of inositol triphosphate (IP3) and other 
agents. In non-excitable cells (i.e., those that lack voltage-gated Ca2+
channels, such as hepatocytes), this mode of Ca2+ entry is thought to be an
important step in generating the oscillations of intracellular Ca2+
concentration that characterise their response to stimulatory agents [1].

Studies on the visual transduction system in Drosophila led to the molecular
cloning of Trp and of a related protein, Trp-like, which show similarity to 
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the regions known as S3-S6, including the S5-
S6 linker, which forms the ion-selective channel pore [2]. This provided 
evidence that Trp and/or related proteins might form mammalian capacitative 
Ca2+ entry channels. The sequences of these proteins have varying lengths 
(usually 800-1000 amino acid residues), and hydropathy plots suggest they 
have 6 or more transmembrane (TM) domains, flanked by cytosolic N- and C-
termini In addition, most contain N-terminal ankyrin repeats [2,3]. 

Following the cloning of the vanilloid receptor (VR1), at least 4 other
related proteins have been identified. Together, these form a distinct
subgroup of the Trp family. Members of the vanilloid receptor family (TRPV)
are activated by a diverse range of stimuli, including heat, protons,
lipids, phorbols, phosphorylation, changes in extracellular osmolarity
and/or pressure, and depletion of intracellular calcium stores [3]. To date,
2 vanilloid receptor-like proteins (VRL-1 and VRL-2) and at least 2 
epithelial calcium channels (ECAC) have been reported.

TRPVRECEPTOR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
vanilloid receptor (TRPV) family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the TRPV family but distinguish them from closely
related members of the ECAC channel family. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f 
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 25 
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found: Q9H303, 
Q9Z182 and Q9JLM0 are closely related channel proteins that fail to make 
significant matches with one or more motifs; and Q95LU9 is a hypothetical 
protein from the crab-eating macaque, which matches motifs 8 and 10.
