NPFFRECEPTOR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine,
para-crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Neuropeptide FF (and neuropeptide AF, which is also derived from the same
precursor) belong to a family of neuropeptides containing an RF-amide motif
at their C-terminus [6]. Neuropeptide FF (NPFF) is found at high
concentrations in the posterior pituitary, spinal cord, hypothalamus and
medulla and is believed to be involved in pain modulation, opioid tolerance,
cardiovascular regulation, memory and neuroendocrine regulation [6,7]. Two G
protein-coupled receptors for NPFF have been identified; both are expressed
in the central nervous system and couple to Gi proteins to inhibit adenylyl
cyclase [7-9].

NPFFRECEPTOR is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
neuropeptide FF receptor family. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections 
that characterise the neuropeptide FF receptors but distinguish them from 
the rest of the rhodopsin-like superfamily - motif 1 resides at the 
N-terminus; motif 2 lies in TM domain 1; motif 3 is located at the 
C-terminus of TM domain 2, leading into the first external loop; motif 4 
spans the C-terminal portion of TM domain 3 and the second cytoplasmic loop;
motif 5 lies in the third external loop, leading into TM domain 7; and 
motif 6 resides at the C-terminus of TM domain 7. A single iteration on 
SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences 
being identified beyond the starting set.
