TAP2PROTEIN
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily contains membrane
proteins that are responsible for the translocation of a variety of
substrates across membranes, using energy derived from ATP hydrolysis [1].
The ABC transporter genes are typically organised to encode either full
transporters that contain two hydrophobic transmembrane (TM) domains and
two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs), or half transporters that comprise
one TM and one NBD, with half transporters needing to form homo- or
heterodimers to produce functional transporters [1,2]. The ABCB2 gene
product is a half transporter that plays an essential role during antigen
processing, and contains both an N-terminal TM domain and a C-terminal NBD
[1,3-5].

During antigen processing, products of proteosomal degradation are
translocated from the cytosol to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) by the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP), to
awaiting major histocompatibility complex class I molecules [3-6]. The
current model of a TAP transporter is of a heterodimer of ABCB2 and ABCB3
polypeptides, in which the TM segments of TAP form a pore in the membrane,
with the peptide-binding site located at the cytosolic mouth of this pore
[6]. The binding of peptide to TAP has been demonstrated to produce
conformational changes in TAP, with ABCB2 and ABCB3 each playing different
roles in peptide binding and translocation [6,7].

ATP hydrolysis by ABCB3, not by ABCB2, is critical for transporter function,
as the ATPase activity of ABCB3 is required for TAP to bind cytosolic
peptides [6]. The substitution of key lysine residues in the Walker A
motifs of ABCB2 and ABCB3 indicted that ABCB2-mediated ATP hydrolysis is not
essential for peptide translocation, whereas ABCB3-mediated ATP-hydrolysis
is critical to both the binding and translocation of peptides [6].

TAP2PROTEIN is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the B3
subfamily of ABC transporters. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those areas that 
characterise TAP2 half-transporters but distinguish them from other members 
of the ABC transporter superfamily - motifs 1-5 reside in the N-terminal 
putative cytosolic domain; motifs 6-8 lie in the putative TM helices; and 
motif 9 lies in the NBD, proximal to the ATP-binding site. Three iterations 
on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 19 sequences was identified.
