INEBRIATED
Neurotransmitter transport systems are integral to the release, re-uptake
and recycling of neurotransmitters at synapses. High affinity tranport
proteins found in the plasma membrane of presynaptic nerve terminals and
glial cells are responsible for the removal from the extracellular space
of released-transmitters, thereby terminating their actions [1]. Plasma
membrane neurotransmitter transporters fall into two structurally and
mechanistically distinct families. The majority of the transporters
constitute an extensive family of homologous proteins that derive energy
from the co-transport of Na+ and Cl-, in order to transport neurotransmitter
molecules into the cell against their concentration gradient. The family 
has a common structure of 12 presumed transmembrane (TM) helices and 
includes carriers for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), noradrenaline/
adrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, proline, glycine, choline, betaine and 
taurine. They are structurally distinct from the second more-restricted
family of plasma membrane transporters, which are responsible for excitatory
amino acid tranport. The latter couple glutamate and aspartate uptake to the
co-transport of Na+ and the counter-transport of K+, with no apparent
dependence on Cl- [2]. In addition, both of these transporter families
are distinct from the vesicular neurotransmitter transporters [3,4].

Sequence analysis of the Na+/Cl- neurotransmitter superfamily reveals that
it can be divided into four subfamilies, these being transporters for
monoamines, the amino acids proline and glycine, GABA, and a group of
orphan transporters [5].

On the basis of behavioural interactions with mutations in the Shaker K+
channel gene of Drosophila, mutations in a new gene, called inebriated
(ine), were isolated. Considering the distinctive phenotype displayed by
these flies, it was postulated that the ine mutation might increase
neuronal excitability [6]. Subsequently the ine mutation was mapped, and
the gene was cloned. The ine gene encodes a protein of 658 amino acids
with a high degree of sequence similarity to members of the Na+/Cl- 
-dependent neurotransmitter transporter superfamily. Therefore ine
mutations may cause increased excitability of the Drosophila motor neuron,
as a result of defective re-uptake of its substrate neurotransmitter,
the identity of which remains to be determined [7].

INEBRIATED is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Drosophilia inebriated neurotransmitter transporter. The fingerprint was
derived from an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, 
focusing on those sections that characterise the inebriated transporter but
distinguish it from others - motif 1 resides within the putative cytoplasmic
C-terminus; motif 2 lies on the extracellular loop located between putative
TM domains 5 and 6; and motifs 3-4 encode portions of the cytoplasmic 
C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach 
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
