BORPETOXINA
A large group of bacterial exotoxins are referred to as "A/B toxins", 
essentially because they are formed from two subunits [1]. The "A" subunit
possesses enzyme activity, and is transferred to the host cell following
a conformational change in the membrane-bound transport "B" subunit [1].

Bordetella pertussis is the causative agent of whooping cough, and is a 
Gram-negative aerobic coccus. Its major virulence factor is the pertussis 
toxin, an A/B exotoxin that mediates both colonisation and toxaemic stages
of the the disease [2,3,5]. Recombinant, inactive forms of the 5 subunits
that make up the toxin have proven to be good vaccines.

The S1 ("A") subunit of pertussis toxin causes the characteristic sound of 
the "whoop" in whooping cough. It achieves this through ADP-ribosylation of 
host Gi alpha-units, an adenylate cyclase inhibitor [2,3]. Uninhibited, this 
enzyme produces elevated levels of cAMP, leading to increased cell exudate 
and inflammation in the lungs [4]. 

The crystal structure of pertussis toxin has been determined to 2.9A 
resolution [5]. The catalytic A-subunit (S1) shares structural similarity
with other ADP-ribosylating bacterial toxins, although differences in the
C-terminal portion explain its unique activation mechanism [5]. Despite its
heterogeneous subunit composition, the structure of the cell-binding
B-oligomer (S2, S3, two copies of S4, and S5) resembles the symmetrical
B-pentamers of the cholera and Shiga toxin families, but it interacts
differently with the A-subunit and there is virtually no sequence 
similarity between B-subunits of the different toxins [5]. 

BORPETOXINA is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
Bordetella pertussis toxin A subunits. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length (~250 amino acids) - motif 1 
spans beta-strands 1 and 2 and alpha-helix 1, which lies between them; 
motif 2 includes strand 3 and the N-terminus of helix 4; motif 3 spans 
strands 4 and 5; motif 4 encodes strands 6-8 and helix 8, and includes an
active site glutamate residue; motif 5 includes strand 9; and motif 6 spans
helix 9. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 3 sequences was identified.
