PDEFORMYLASE
Peptide deformylase (PDF) is an essential metalloenzyme required for the 
removal of the formyl group at the N-terminus of nascent polypeptide chains
in eubacteria [1]. The enzyme acts as a monomer and binds a single zinc ion,
catalysing the reaction:

	N-FORMYL-L-METHIONINE + H(2)O = FORMATE + L-METHIONINE

Catalytic efficiency strongly depends on the identity of the bound metal [2]. 

PDF, a member of the zinc metalloproteases family, comprises an active core
domain of 147 residues and a C-terminal tail of 21 residues [3]. The 3D fold
of the catalytic core has been determined by X-ray crystallography and NMR
[1-3]. Overall, the structure contains a series of anti-parallel beta-
strands that surround two perpendicular alpha-helices [3]. The C-terminal 
helix contains the characteristic HEXXH motif of metalloenzymes, which is
crucial for activity. The helical arrangement, and the way the histidine
residues bind the zinc ion, is reminiscent of other metalloproteases, such
as thermolysin or metzincins. However, the arrangement of secondary and
tertiary structures of PDF, and the positioning of its third zinc ligand (a
cysteine residue), are quite different. These discrepancies, together with 
notable biochemical differences, suggest that PDF constitutes a new class of
zinc-metalloproteases [3].

PDEFORMYLASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
peptide deformylases. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 11 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the C-terminal two-
thirds of alpha-helix 2 and beta-strands 1 and 2; motif 2 contains the metal-
binding cysteine residue; motif 3 includes strand 5; and motif 4 spans
strand 6 and helix 3, which contains two metal-binding histidine residues.
Seven iterations on SPTR39.22_17.3f were required to reach convergence, at
which point a true set comprising 54 sequences was identified. Several 
partial matches were also found, all of which are putative deformylases that
fail to match one or more motifs.
