AP2CTNSCPFCT
Activator protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factors constitute a family of
closely related and evolutionarily conserved proteins that bind to the DNA 
consensus sequence GCCNNNGGC and stimulate target gene transcription [1,2].
Four different isoforms of AP-2 have been identifed in mammals, termed AP-2
alpha, beta, gamma and delta. Each family member shares a common structure, 
possessing a proline/glutamine-rich domain in the N-terminal region, which 
is responsible for transcriptional activation [1], and a helix-span-helix
domain in the C-terminal region, which mediates dimerisation and site-
specific DNA binding [2].

The AP-2 family have been shown to be critical regulators of gene expression
during embryogenesis. They regulate the development of facial prominence and
limb buds, and are essential for cranial closure and development of the lens
[3]; they have also been implicated in tumorigenesis. AP-2 protein 
expression levels have been found to affect cell transformation, tumour 
growth and metastasis, and may predict survival in some types of cancer [4,5].

AP-2 gamma was originally isolated from murine carcinoma cells [6]. The 
gene was found to be expressed in several embryonic areas whose development 
can be affected by retinoids, such as the forebrain, face and limb buds [6].
A human homologue has also been identified. The protein was initially termed
AP-2.2, but has since been reclassified as AP-2 gamma.

AP2CTNSCPFCT is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
transcription factor AP-2 gamma proteins. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions in the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections
which characterise AP-2 gamma but distinguish it from other family members -
motifs 1 and 2 lie in the transcriptional activation domain; and motifs 3 
and 4 reside between the transcriptional activation domain and the 
dimerisation domain. A single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
