HDASUPER
Histone deacetylases (HDA), acetoin utilisation proteins (ACUC) and
acetylpolyamine amidohydrolases (APHA) form an ancient protein superfamily
and are all believed to catalyse the deacetylation of a substrate [1]. HDAs
are found in eukaryotes, from yeast to humans; ACUCs are found in 
eubacteria; and APHAs occur in archaeal bacteria, eubacteria and some
eukaryotic organisms [1]. HDA nomenclature is confusing: the family
can also be identified by the codes RPD, HOS, HD and HDAC, regardless of
specific sequence similarities [1]. HDAs may have evolved at least twice
from APHAs, the more recent gene duplication event resembling APHAs more 
closely [1].

Only the most highly conserved regions in the group of HDAs including RPD3
are similar to regions in the prokaryotic enzymes [2]. Many of the invariant
residues are histidine, glycine, cysteine, aspartic acid or glutamic acid,
and may be essential for maintaining structural integrity or catalytic
activity [1,2]. Histidines and acidic amino acids may be required for the
co-ordination of metal ion cofactors; APHA is known to contain one zinc ion
that is necessary for catalysis [2].

The crystal structure of a HDA homologue from the hyperthermophilic
bacterium Aquifex aeolicus has revealed that it has a single domain
structure belonging to the open alpha/beta class of folds [3]. It consists
of a central eight-stranded parallel beta-sheet and 16 alpha-helices [3].
Seven loops form an active site comprising a tubular pocket, a zinc-binding
site and two Asp-His charge relay systems; thus the active site has features
of metalloproteases and serine proteases [3].

HDASUPER is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
histone deacetylase superfamily. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 13 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 encodes the loop
between beta-strand 3 and alpha-helix 9; motif 2 spans strand 4 and the
following loop; and motif 3 includes strand 7 and part of the loop between
this and helix 13. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 52 sequences was
identified. 
