PEROPSIN
Opsins are integral membrane proteins that belong to a superfamily of G-
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). The activating ligands of the different
superfamily members vary widely in structure and character, yet the proteins
appear faithfully to have conserved a basic structural framework, believed
to consist of 7 transmembrane (TM) helices. Although the sequences of these
proteins are very diverse, reflecting to some extent this broad range of
activating ligands, nevertheless, motifs have been identified in the TM
regions that are characteristic of virtually the entire superfamily [1,2].
Amongst the exceptions are the olfactory receptors, which cluster together
in a subfamily, which lacks significant matches with domains 2, 4 and 6.
Interestingly, the opsins also seem to be emerging as increasingly atypical
of the superfamily, clustering most strongly, in phylogenetic analyses, with
the olfactory receptors [2]. 

Visual pigments are the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision [3,4].
They comprise an apoprotein (opsin), covalently linked to the chromophore
cis-retinal. Vision is effected through the absorption of a photon by the
chromophore, which is isomerised to the all-trans form, promoting a
conformational change in the protein.

Peropsin is a visual pigment-like protein found in ocular tissues [5].
The protein has been localised to the apical face of the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE), most prominently to the microvilli that surround the
photoreceptor outer segments [5]. It is believed that peropsin may play a 
role in RPE physiology, either by detecting light directly, or by monitoring
the concentration of retinoids or other photoreceptor-derived compounds [5]. 

PEROPSIN is an 11-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
peropsins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 2
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the
peropsins but distinguish them from the rest of the opsin family - motif 1
lies at the N-terminus, leading into TM domain 1; motif 2 spans the first
cytoplasmic loop; motifs 3 and 4 span the C-terminal portion of TM domain 2
and the first external loop; motif 5 encodes the N-terminal portion of TM
domain 3; motif 6 lies in the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 7 encodes the
N-terminal portion of TM domain 5; motif 8 resides in the third cytoplasmic
loop; motif 9 spans the third external loop and the N-terminal portion of
TM domain 7; and motifs 10 and 11 reside at the C-terminus. A single 
iteration on SPTR37_10f was required to reach convergnence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
