ANNEXINXIII
The annexins (or lipocortins) are a family of proteins that bind to
phospholipids in a calcium-dependent manner [1]. They are distributed
ubiquitously in different tissues and cell types of higher and lower
eukaryotes, including mammals, fish, birds, Drosophila melanogaster, Xenopus
laevis, Caenorhabtidis elegans, Dictyostelium discoideum and Neurospora 
crassa [2,3]. The plant annexins are somewhat distinct from those found in
other taxa [3].

Several distinct annexin subtypes exist, each of which has an amino acid
sequence consisting of an N-terminal 'arm' followed by 4 or 8 copies of a
conserved domain of 61 residues (only one of these residues, an arginine,
is conserved between all copies). The calcium binding sites are found within
the repeated domains [4]. Individual repeats (sometimes referred to as 
endonexin folds) consist of 5 alpha-helices wound into a right-handed
superhelix. The biological roles of some annexin subtypes is unclear; the
family has been linked with inhibition of phospholipase activity,
exocytosis and endoctyosis, signal transduction, organisation of the
extracellular matrix, resistance to reactive oxygen species and DNA
replication [2].

Screening of a cDNA library with intestine-specific sequences revealed a
cDNA deriving from apparently gut-specific mRNA. Subsequent analysis 
revealed that this encoded a 316-residue protein belonging to the annexin/
lipocortin family (specifically, annexin XIII). Type XIII annexin is also 
referred to as intestine-specific annexin (ISA) [5].

ANNEXINXIII is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type XIII annexins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the
N-terminal two-thirds of the alignment, focusing on those sections that
characterise type XIII annexins but distinguish them from other closely
related annexin subtypes - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus; motif 2 resides 
between the first and second tetrad repeat; and motif 3 lies between the
second and third repeat, including the C-terminal portion of repeat 2. Two
iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 3 sequences was identified.
