INNEXIN
Innexins are an invertebrate-specific family of gap junction-forming
proteins. They bear no sequence similarity to the well-characterised
vertebrate gap junction channel-forming molecules (connexins), but share a
similar predicted membrane topology of four transmembrane (TM) domains, with
intercellular N- and C-termini [1].

The innexins were initially identified by genetic screens in both C.elegans
and Drosophila species. When their genes were disrupted by mutation, a 
number of abnormal phenotypes were noted. Mutation of C.elegans unc-7 leads
to an uncoordinated phenotype, while eat-5 mutations disrupt pharyngeal 
pumping (a process involved in feeding). Drosophila passover (pas) mutation 
leads to individuals that are unable to fly properly, and have impaired 
escape responses [2]. Further experiments have demonstrated that pas
mutation inactivates electrical synapses between neurones that are involved 
in the neural circuits responsible for these behaviours.

To date, 5 fly innexins have been identified, together with more than 25
from worm species, most of the latter arising from the C.elegans
sequencing project.

INNEXIN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for innexins.
The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 14 sequences: the
motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the first 2/3 of the
alignment - motif 1 encodes the C-terminal half of the first putative TM
domain; motif 2 lies on the first extracellular loop; motifs 3 and 4 encode
most of the second and third TM domains, respectively; motif 5 lies on the 
second extracellular loop; and motif 6 spans the end of the second 
extracellular loop and the start of the fourth TM domain. Two iterations on
SPTR37_10f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 25 sequences was identified. Two partial matches were also
found, O61788 and P91827, both of which have arisen from the C.elegans
sequencing project and have been noted to be similar to functionally-
characterised innexins.
