RNABINDINGM8
RNA-binding motif protein 8 (RBM8) contains a putative RNA-binding domain 
known as an RNA recognition motif (RRM). The RRM motif is found in numerous
RNA-binding proteins, including heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(hnRNPs), and proteins implicated in regulation of alternative splicing. The
RRM is a 90-residue domain that binds single-stranded RNA; the structure
consists of four beta-stands and two alpha-helices arranged in an alpha/beta 
sandwich, with a third helix present in some cases during RNA binding [1].
Three-dimensional modelling of the RBM8 RRM domain indicates that the
sequences fold into an RNA-binding domain, forming a hydrophobic core
between a beta-sheet and two helices.

The human RBM8A protein is ubiquitously expressed; the protein is localised
predominantly in the cell nucleus and diffused throughout the cytoplasm
[2]. It preferentially associates with mRNAs produced by splicing, including
both nuclear mRNAs and newly exported cytoplasmic mRNAs. Evidence suggests
the protein remains associated with spliced mRNAs as a tag to indicate the
position of spliced introns. Human RBM8A protein specicially binds to MAGOH,
the human homologue of Drosophila mago nashi, a protein required for normal
germ plasm development in the Drosophila embryo [3]; a similar association
occurs with the Drosophila RBM8 protein, Tsunagi [4].

The RBM8A and RBM8B protein sequences contain a putative bipartate nuclear
localisation signal [5] at the N-terminus, as well a stretch of glycine
residues. In addition, the RRM contained within RBM8A and RBM8B contains 
one set of the two consensus nucleic acid-binding motifs, RNP-1 and RNP-2,
charactersitic of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP). 

RNABINDINGM8 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
RNA-binding motif 8 protein family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning the full alignment length - motifs 2-4 span the RRM. Two
iterations SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, at which point a
true set comprising 10 sequences was identified.
