BLCTOGLOBULN
The lipocalins are a diverse, interesting, yet poorly understood family of 
proteins composed, in the main, of extracellular ligand-binding proteins
displaying high specificity for small hydrophobic molecules [1,2]. Functions
of these proteins include transport of nutrients, control of cell regula-
tion, pheromone transport, cryptic colouration and the enzymatic synthesis
of prostaglandins.
 
The crystal structures of several lipocalins have been solved and show a 
novel 8-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel fold well conserved within the
family. Sequence similarity within the family is at a much lower level and
would seem to be restricted to conserved disulphides and 3 motifs, which
form a juxtaposed cluster that may act as a common cell surface receptor
site [2]. By contrast, at the more variable end of the fold are found an 
internal ligand binding site and a putative surface for the formation of 
macromolecular complexes [4]. The anti-parallel beta-barrel fold is also
exploited by the fatty acid-binding proteins (which function similarly by
binding small hydrophobic molecules), by avidin and the closely related
metalloprotease inhibitors, and by triabin. Similarity at the sequence 
level, however, is less obvious, being confined to a single short 
N-terminal motif.

The lipocalin family can be subdivided into kernal and outlier sets. The
kernal lipocalins form the largest self-consistent group (see LIPOCALIN
signature). The outlier lipocalins form several smaller distinct subgroups: 
the OBPs, the von Ebner's gland proteins, alpha-1-acid glycoproteins, 
tick histamine binding proteins and the nitrophorins.

Beta-lactoglobulin (Blg) is the major protein component of milk from a wide  
range of species but not human [5]. Glycodelin or PP14 protein is the human 
equivalent of Blg and is secreted into the endometrium. Blg binds a wide 
variety of hydrophobic ligands but its function remains unknown. The crystal
structure of Blg has been solved [6], confirming membership of the lipocalin
protein family.

BLCTOGLOBULN is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for  
beta-lactoglobulins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 5 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning
virtually the full alignment length - motif 1, which includes the region
encoded by PROSITE pattern LIPOCALIN (PS00213) and corresponds to the first
motif of the lipocalin fingerprint, spans the first alpha-helix and the 
first beta-strand; motif 2 spans the C-terminus of strand 2 and the second
helix; motif 3 encodes the C-terminal half of strand 3 and the N-terminal
portion of strand 4; motif 4 encodes the C-terminus of strand 5 and strand 6;
motif 5, which spans the C-terminus of strand 7 and strand 8, corresponds to
the second motif of the lipocalin fingerprint; and motif 6, which spans
strand 9 and the N-terminus of helix 4, is similar to the third lipocalin
motif. Two iterations on SPRT37_10f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set of 17 sequences was identified. Three partial
matches were also found, all of which are strongly divergent marsupial
lactoglobulins that match only motif 5 and either motif 4 or 3.
