DENSEGRNULE7
Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular apicomplexan protozoan 
parasite, with a complex lifestyle involving varied hosts [1]. It has two 
phases of growth: an intestinal phase in feline hosts, and an extra-
intestinal phase in other mammals. Oocysts from infected cats develop 
into tachyzoites, and eventually, bradyzoites and zoitocysts in the 
extraintestinal host [1]. Transmission of the parasite occurs through 
contact with infected cats or raw/undercooked meat; in immunocompromised 
individuals, it can cause severe and often lethal toxoplasmosis. Acute 
infection in healthy humans can sometimes also cause tissue damage [1].

The protozoan utilises a variety of secretory and antigenic proteins to 
invade a host and gain access to the intracellular environment [2]. These 
originate from distinct organelles in the T.gondii cell termed micronemes,  
rhoptries, and dense granules. They are released at specific times during 
invasion to ensure the proteins are allocated to their correct target 
destinations [2]. 

Dense granule antigens (GRAs) are released from the T.gondii tachyzoite
while still encapsulated in a host vacuole. Gra7, one of these moieties, is
believed to be secreted by the parasite during the late phase of intra-
vacuolar habitation [3]. Studies utilising immunogold labelling have
localised Gra7 to the parasitophorous vacuolar membrane, and the network 
tubules formed by the Gra2/4/6 complex [4]. It has been suggested that 
dense granule antigens stimulate humoral immunity in the host [4]. A 
homologue of Gra7 is found in Neospora caninum.

DENSEGRNULE7 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
dense granule Gra7 proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 lies in the putative
signal sequence; and motif 4 encodes the putative transmembrane domain. A 
single iteration on SPTR40_20f was required to reach convergence, no further
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. 
