JANUSKINASE2
Janus kinases (JAKs) are tyrosine kinases that function in membrane-proximal
signalling events initiated by a variety of extracellular factors binding to
cell surface receptors. Many type I and II cytokine receptors lack a protein
tyrosine kinase domain and rely on JAKs to initiate the cytoplasmic signal 
transduction cascade [1,2]. Ligand binding induces oligomerisation of the
receptors, which then activates the cytoplasmic receptor-associated JAKs.
These subsequently phosphorylate tyrosine residues along the receptor chains
with which they are associated. The phosphotyrosine residues are a target
for a variety of SH2 domain-containing transducer proteins. Amongst these
are the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins,
which, after binding to the receptor chains, are phosphorylated by the JAK
proteins. Phosphorylation enables the STAT proteins to dimerise and
translocate into the nucleus, where they alter the expression of cytokine-
regulated genes. This system is known as the JAK-STAT pathway [3]

Four mammalian JAK family members have been identified: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, 
and TYK2. They are relatively large kinases of approximately 1150 amino 
acids, with molecular weights of ~120-130kDa. Their amino acid sequences
are characterised by the presence of 7 highly conserved domains, termed
JAK homology (JH) domains [4]. The C-terminal domain (JH1) is responsible 
for the tyrosine kinase function. The next domain in the sequence (JH2) is 
known as the tyrosine kinase-like domain, as its sequence shows high 
similarity to functional kinases but does not possess any catalytic 
activity [5]. Although the function of this domain is not well established,
there is some evidence for a regulatory role on the JH1 domain, thus
modulating catalytic activity [6]. The N-terminal portion of the JAKs 
(spanning JH7 to JH3) is important for receptor association and 
non-catalytic activity [7].

JAK2 was initially cloned using a PCR-based strategy utilising primers 
corresponding to conserved motifs within the catalytic domain of protein-
tyrosine kinases [4]. In common with JAK1 and TYK2, and by contrast with
JAK3, JAK2 appears to be ubiquitously expressed [2]. 

JANUSKINASE2 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
janus kinase 2 (JAK2) proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
in the N-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that 
characterise JAK2 but distinguish it from other family members - motif 1
resides between the JH7 and JH6 domains; motif 2 lies within the JH4 domain;
and motif 3 resides between the JH3 domain and JH2 tyrosine kinase-like 
domain. Two iterations on SPTR40_20f were required to reach convergence, 
at which point a true set comprising 7 sequences was identified.
