RTXTOXIND
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. Four principal exotoxin secretion systems have been described
[1]. In the type II and IV secretion systems, toxins are first exported to
the periplasm by way of a cleaved N-terminal signal sequence; a second set
of proteins is used for extracellular transport (type II), or the C-terminus
of the exotoxin itself is used (type IV). Type III secretion involves at 
least 20 molecules that assemble into a needle; effector proteins are then 
translocated through this without need of a signal sequence. In the Type I 
system, a complete channel is formed through both membranes, and the 
secretion signal is carried on the C-terminus of the exotoxin. 

The RTX (repeats in toxin) family of cytolytic toxins belong to the Type I 
secretion system, and are important virulence factors in Gram-negative 
bacteria. As well as the C-terminal signal sequence, several glycine-rich
repeats are also found. These are essential for binding calcium, and are 
critical for the biological activity of the secreted toxins [2,3]. All RTX
toxin operons exist in the order rtxCABD, RtxA protein being the structural
component of the exotoxin, both RtxB and D being required for its export
from the bacterial cell; RtxC is an acyl-carrier-protein-dependent acyl-
modification enzyme, required to convert RtxA to its active form [4].

Escherichia coli hemolysin (HlyA) is often quoted as the model for RTX 
toxins. Recent work on its relative rtxC gene product HlyC [5] has revealed 
that it provides the acylation aspect for post-translational modification
of two internal lysine residues in the HlyA protein. HlyD provides a 
cytoplasmic transport moiety for HlyA, and is situated in both the 
cytoplasm and periplasm, having a single transmembrane segment [6].

RTXTOXIND is a 7-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
Gram-negative bacterial RTX secretion protein D family. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 8 sequences: the motifs were drawn 
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length. Four
iterations on SPTR39_15f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 46 sequences was identified. Several partial matches
were also found, all of which are known HlyD family members and other 
secretion proteins that fail to make significant matches with one or more
motifs. 
