HTHFIS
Transcriptional regulators of prokaryotes play an important role in the 
production of several proteins, and in the growth of the cell [1]. By 
regulating gene expression, activation or repression of transcription of a 
variety of genes can be achieved [1]. 

The Factor for Inversion Stimulation (FIS) protein is a regulator of
bacterial functions, and binds specifically to weakly related DNA sequences 
[1,2]. It activates ribosomal RNA transcription, and is involved in upstream
activation of rRNA promoters. Found in gamma proteobacterial microbes, the
protein has been shown to play a role in the regulation of virulence factors
in both Salmonella typhimurium and Esherichia coli [2,3]. Some of its
functions include inhibition of the initiation of DNA replication from the
OriC site, and promotion of Hin-mediated DNA inversion [3].

In its C-terminal extremity, FIS encodes a helix-turn-helix (HTH) DNA-
binding motif, which shares a high degree of similarity with other HTH
motifs of more primitive bacterial transcriptional regulators, such as the
nitrogen assimilation regulatory proteins (NtrC) from species like Azobacter,
Rhodobacter and Rhizobium. This has led to speculation that both evolved
from a single common ancestor [4]. 

The 3-dimensional structure of the E.coli FIS DNA-binding protein has been
determined by means of X-ray diffraction to 2.0A resolution [5,6]. FIS is
composed of four alpha-helices tightly intertwined to form a globular dimer
with two protruding HTH motifs. The 24 N-terminal amino acids are poorly 
defined, indicating that they might act as 'feelers' suitable for DNA or
protein (invertase) recognition [5]. 

HTHFIS is a 2-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the FIS 
bacterial regulatory protein HTH motif. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 11 sequences: the motifs span the C-terminal HTH motif
- motif 1 encodes the first helix and motif 2 the second. Twelve iterations
on SPTR39.22_17.3f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true
set comprising 158 sequences was identified.
