PROMCHFAMILY
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide originally
identified in teleost fish [1,2]. In fish, MCH is released from the
pituitary and causes lightening of skin pigment cells through pigment
aggregation [1,3]. In mammals, MCH is predominantly expressed in the
hypothalamus, and functions as a neurotransmitter in the control of a range
of functions [3]. A major role of MCH is thought to be in the regulation of
feeding: injection of MCH into rat brains stimulates feeding; expression of
MCH is upregulated in the hypothalamus of obese and fasting mice; and mice
lacking MCH are lean and eat less [1]. MCH and alpha melanocyte-stimulating
hormone (alpha-MSH) have antagonistic effects on a number of physiological
functions. Alpha-MSH darkens pigmentation in fish and reduces feeding in
mammals, whereas MCH increases feeding [1,3].

MCH is derived from a pre-pro-hormone (pre-pro-MCH), which contains 1-2
hormones other than MCH, depending on the species. In all species, the 17-19
C-terminal amino acids are cleaved to release MCH. In mammals, amino acids
132-144 encode the hormone neuropeptide EI (NEI), whilst in salmonids, the
analagous region encodes neuropeptide EV (NEV), and in other fish, the region
determines MCH gene-related peptide (Mgrp) [4]. A further peptide, known as
neuropeptide GE (NGE), is thought to be found in mammalian pre-pro-MCH
upstream of NEI, encoded by amino acids 110-129. NEI has been shown to
enhance oxytocin and reduce arginine vasopressin secretion from rat
pituitary [5]. Two paralogues of MCH, known as pro-MCH-like 1 and 2 genes
(PMCHL1 and PMCHL2), which arose recently in primate evolution, also
exist. At present, it is unclear whether the PMCHL genes are functional 
genes or inactive pseudogenes [6].

PROMCHFAMILY is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
pre-pro melanin-concentrating hormone family. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: motif 1 lies in the signal peptide
at the N-terminus; motif 2 spans the N-terminus of NEI/NEV and amino acids
upstream of this peptide; and motif 3 encodes the whole MCH peptide. Two
iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which point
a true set comprising 12 sequences were identified. Two partial matches were
also found, Q9BQC4 and Q9NRF0, which are variants of PMCHL1 that lack the
MCH peptide at the C-terminus. 
