GLUCTRSPORT3
The ability to transport glucose across the plasma membrane is a feature
common to nearly all cells, from simple bacteria through to highly
specialised mammalian neurones. Facilitative glucose (and fructose)
transport is mediated by members of the GLUT transporter family. These
are glycosylated transmembrane (TM) proteins that transport glucose in a
passive (i.e., energy-independent) manner. In consequence, they can only
transport glucose down its concentration gradient. Currently, five such
mammalian transporters have been cloned and functionally characterised
[1-3]. Four of these transport glucose (GLUT1-4), whereas GLUT5 prefer-
entially transports fructose. A sixth cDNA, encoding an apparent glucose
transporter, was cloned but was found to be a pseudo-gene (GLUT6) [4].
Similarly, another cDNA thought to encode a glucose transporter that was
targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum was eventually realised to be an
experimental cloning artefact (GLUT7) [5].

The five confirmed isoforms are expressed in a tissue and cell-specific
manner, and have been found to exhibit distinct kinetic and regulatory
properties, presumably reflecting their specific functional roles in these
locations. Hydropathy analysis reveals they have 12 presumed TM domains, 
and that they belong to a much larger 'major facilitator superfamily' of 12
TM transporters that are involved in the transport of a variety of hexoses
and other carbon compounds, including: bacterial sugar-proton symporters 
(H+/xylose and H+/arabinose); bacterial transporters of carboxylic acids
and antibiotics; and sugar transporters in various yeast, protozoa and
higher plants. Nevertheless, amino acid identity within the superfamily may
be as low as ~25% [6,7]. Besides the 12 presumed TM domains, the most
characteristic structural feature of the superfamily is the presence of a
five residue motif (RXGRR, where X is any amino acid). In the GLUT 
transporters, this motif is present in the presumed cytoplasmic loops
connecting TM domains 2 with 3, and also 8 with 9. The 12 TM transporter
superfamily appears to be structurally unrelated to the Na+-coupled,
Na+/glucose co-transporters (SGLT1-3) found in the intestine and kidney,
which are able to transport glucose against its concentration gradient [8].

Comparison of the hydropathy profiles for GLUT1-5 reveals that they are
virtually superimposable, despite the fact that their primary structures
may differ by up to 60%. Of the presumed TM domains, the fourth, fifth
and sixth are the most highly conserved, and conserved residues are also
found in the short exofacial loops joining the putative TM regions. The
presumed cytoplasmic N- and C-termini, and the extracellular loop between
the first and second TM domains, show the greatest divergence, both in
terms of primary structure and size.

GLUT3 is the most prominent glucose transporter isoform expressed in adult
brain, where it tends to be preferentially located in neurones, rather
than in other cell types, such as glia or endothelial cells. It is also
widely distributed in other human tissues, having been detected in the
liver, kidney and placenta. In other species, it shows a more restricted
expression pattern. It consists of 496 amino acids (human isoform) and
shares 64% amino acid identity with GLUT1 and 52% with GLUT2.

GLUCTRSPORT3 is a 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
mammalian glucose transporter type 3 isoform. The fingerprint was derived
from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing
on those sections that characterise the glucose co-transporter type 3
isoform but distinguish it from others - motif 1 lies at the N-terminus
of the first putative TM domain; motif 2 encodes ~1/2 the fourth presumed
TM domain; and motif 3 lies near the end of the cytoplasmic C-terminus. A
single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
