TNFACTORR7
The tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (TNFR) superfamily comprises more
than 20 type-I transmembrane proteins. Family members are defined based on
similarity in their extracellular domain - a region that contains many
cysteine residues arranged in a specific repetitive pattern [1]. The
cysteines allow formation of an extended rod-like structure, responsible for
ligand binding [2].

Upon receptor activation, different intracellular signalling complexes are
assembled for different members of the TNFR superfamily, depending on their
intracellular domains and sequences [3]. Activation of TNFRs can therefore
induce a range of disparate effects, including cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, or apoptotic cell death, depending upon the
receptor involved [4,5].

TNFRs are widely distributed and play important roles in many crucial
biological processes, such as lymphoid and neuronal development, innate and
adaptive immunity, and maintenance of cellular homeostasis [3]. Drugs that
manipulate their signalling have potential roles in the prevention and
treatment of many diseases, such as viral infections, coronary heart
disease, transplant rejection, and immune disease [6].

TNF receptor 7, otherwise known as CD27 antigen, is expressed on discrete 
subpopulations of T- and B-cells [7]. The receptor plays a vital role in the
generation and long-term maintenance of T-cell immunity [8].

TNFACTORR7 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for tumour
necrosis factor receptor 7. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions in 
the N- and C-terminal thirds of the alignment, focusing on those sections 
that characterise TNF receptor 7 but distinguish it from other TNF receptor 
subtypes - motifs 1 and 2 lie within the extracellular N-terminal region;
motif 3 spans part of the extracellular N-terminal region and part of the 
transmembrane domain; and motif 4 resides within the intracellular
C-terminal region. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was
identified. 
