DEZORPHANR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary 
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural 
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5]. 

Several 7TM receptors have been cloned but their endogenous ligands are
unknown; these have been termed orphan receptors. A novel GPCR has been
isolated from a cDNA derived from the cell line NH15-CA2 and a cDNA library
from adult mouse brain [6]. The amino acid sequence of the receptor, DEZ,
shows closest resemblance to neuropeptide and chemoattractant receptors, 
with highest similarity to the orphan receptor GPR-1. In situ hybridisation
experiments indicate that dez is differentially regulated during development,
with prominent expression in developing osseous and cartilaginous tissue [6].
It is also detectable in adult parathyroid glands, suggesting a possible
function in bone metabolism. 

DEZORPHANR is a 10-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
DEZ orphan receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment
of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from short conserved regions spanning
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise the
DEZ receptor but distinguish it from related members of the rhodopsin-like
superfamily - motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus; motif 3 lies in the
first external loop; motif 4 spans the second cytoplasmic loop; motifs 5 and
6 span the second external loop; motifs 7 and 8 span the third cytoplasmic
and external loops respectively; and motifs 9 and 10 reside at the 
C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_9f were required to reach convergence,
at which point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified.
