WORMGLOBIN
Globins are haem-containing proteins involved in dioxygen binding and/or 
transport [1,2]. Hundreds of globin sequences are known [3]. It has been 
proposed that all globins have evolved from a family of ancestral, ~17kDa 
haemoproteins that displayed the globin fold and functioned as redox 
proteins [4]. The globin superfamily includes vertebrate haemoglobins (Hb); 
vertebrate myoglobins (Mb); invertebrate globins; plant leghaemoglobins; and 
bacterial flavohaemoglobins. 

The function of haemoglobins (Hbs) is transport of dioxygen in blood plasma.
Erythrocruorins (Ec) are extracellular Hbs found freely dissolved in the 
blood of annelids and arthropods. Ec molecules exist as aggregates of up to
200 small globin-like subunits, some of which are disulphide-bonded and not
all of which contain haem [5]. Nematodes (e.g., Ascaris) possess an octa-
meric Hb, each subunit containing two globin-like domains. Ascaris Hb binds
oxygen four orders of magnitude more tightly than does human Hb [6]. The
brine shrimp Artemia has evolved the longest known concatenation of globin
domains: each subunit contains 9 globin-like domains, connected by linking
peptides [7]. Artemia possess three types of dimeric haemoglobins: HbI
(alpha+alpha); HbII (alpha+beta); and HbIII (beta+beta). Erythrocytes of 
the marine polychaete Glycera dibranchiata (bloodworm) contain several 
different, single-chain Hbs, some of which self-associate into polydisperse 
polymers [8,9].

The 3D structures of a number of Ecs are known. The protein is largely 
alpha-helical, eight conserved helices (A to H) providing the scaffold for 
a well-defined haem-binding pocket. The imidazole ring of the "proximal" His 
residue provides the fifth haem iron ligand; the other axial haem iron 
position remains essentially free for O(2) coordination. Many Ecs lack
the "distal" His and Val residues that are conserved in vertebrate globins.

The structure of Hb from Glycera has been determined to 2.5A resolution by 
means of X-ray diffraction and refined to 1.5A resolution [9]. Notably, the 
D helix is absent, the F helix has several more residues than in mammalian 
globins, and Pro-105 (G7) causes a bend in the G helix. In addition, the 
substitution of leucine for the distal histidine residue (E7) creates an 
unusually hydrophobic haem pocket [9].

WORMGLOBIN is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for worm
globins. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 5 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning virtually 
the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that characterise  
worm globins but distinguish them from closely related members of the 
erythrocruorin family. Two iterations on SPTR44_27f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6 sequences 
was identified. A single partial match was also found, GLBX_CHITH, a
closely related arthropod globin CTT-X from the midge, Chironomus thummi 
thummi, which matches motifs 1 and 3.

An update on SPTR55_38f identified a true set of 5 sequences.
