EMR1HORMONER
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The secretin-like GPCRs include secretin [2], calcitonin [3], parathyroid
hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides [4] and vasoactive intestinal
peptide [5], all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-
inositol-calcium pathway. The amino acid sequences of the receptors contain
high proportions of hydrophobic residues grouped into 7 domains, in a
manner reminiscent of the rhodopsins and other receptors believed to inter-
act with G proteins. However, while a similar 3D framework has been
proposed to account for this, there is no significant sequence similarity
between these families: the secretin-like receptors thus bear their own
unique '7TM' signature.

F4/80 is a monoclonal antibody that recognises a murine macrophage-
restricted cell surface glycoprotein and has been extensively used to
characterise macrophage populations in a wide range of immunological studies
[6]. Little is known about its possible role in macrophage differentiation
and function. The sequence of the F4/80 protein is similar to two protein
superfamilies: the N-terminal region contains seven epidermal growth factor
(EGF)-like domains, while the C-terminal region contains seven hydrophobic
regions whose signature is consistent with membership of the secretin-like
superfamily of GPCRs. The EGF and GPCR domains are separated from each other
by a serine/threonine-rich domain, a feature reminiscent of mucin-like,
single-span, integral membrane glycoproteins with adhesive properties [7].
Because of its unique characteristics, this putative EGF module-containing, 
mucin-like hormone receptor has been named EMR1 [7]. The EMR1 gene has been
localised to human chromosome 19p13.3 [7]. 

EMR1HORMONER is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for EMR1
hormone receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of
2 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the 
C-terminal half of the alignment, focusing on those sections that 
characterise the EMR1 hormone receptors but distinguish them from the rest
of the secretin-like superfamily - motifs 1-4 lie immediately N-terminal to
TM domain 1; motif 5 spans the loop between TM domains 1 and 2 and the
N-terminal portion of TM domain 2; motif 6 lies in the loop between TM 
domains 3 and 4; motif 7 spans the loop between TM domains 5 and 6, and the
N-terminal portion of TM domain 6; and motif 9 spans the C-terminus. A 
single iteration on SPTR37_9f was required to reach convergence, no further 
sequences being identified beyond the starting set. Two partial matches were
also found, both leucocyte antigen CD97 sequences that match motifs 5 and 8.
