SBIMPHPHTASE
Inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase (1PTASE) and inositol monophosphatase
(MPTASE) are enzymes of the inositol signalling pathway that share similar
enzymatic activity [1]. Both enzymes exhibit an absolute requirement for
metal ions (Mg2+ is preferred), and both are uncompetitively inhibited by
submillimolar concentrations of Li+. Their amino acid sequences contain
a number of conserved motifs, which are also shared by several other 
proteins related to MPTASE (including products of fungal QaX and qutG,
bacterial suhB and cysQ, and yeast hal2) [1]. 

Structural analysis of these proteins has revealed a common core of 155
residues: the core comprises 5 alpha-helices and 11 beta-strands, and
includes residues essential for metal binding and catalysis. While the
core has been conserved, presumably to impart catalytic function, the
loops and regions of structure outside the core have evolved unique
regulatory domains [1].  

An interesting property of the enzymes of this family is their sensitivity
to Li+ at levels achieved in patients undergoing therapy for manic
depression. The targets and mechanism of action of Li+ are unknown, but
overactive inositol phosphate signalling may account for symptoms of the
disease [2,3]. It has been proposed that these Li+-sensitive proteins 
could represent targets for Li+ in manic depressive disease [1,3,4].   

The structures of several members of the superfamily have been determined
by X-ray crystallography [3,5,6]. The fold of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
(FBPTASE) was noted to be identical to that of MPTASE [7]. The suhB gene
product from Escherichia coli, which is thought to participate in post-
transcriptional control of gene expression, also possesses inositol-1-
phosphatase activity [8,9]. The major difference between this enzyme from
other characterised inositol-1-phosphatases is that it exists as a monomer
in solution (rather than a dimer or tetramer); it is also more hydrophobic
- it is thought that these physical differences might underlie the
biological role of wild-type SuhB in E.coli [8].

SBIMPHPHTASE is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
SuhB family of inositol monophosphatases. The fingerprint was derived from
an initial alignment of 30 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those
sections that characterise the SuhB family of inositol monophosphatases but
distinguish them from closely related members of the inositol mono-
phosphatase superfamily. Nine iterations on SPTR55_38f were required to
reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 334 sequences was
identified. Numerous partial matches were also found, all of which are
family members that fail to match one or more motifs. 
