PROSTANOIDR
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that 
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, 
paracrine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the 
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct 
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group 
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship, 
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in 
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like 
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating 
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family 
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of 
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine 
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].
 
Prostanoids (prostaglandins (PG) and thromboxanes (TX)) mediate a wide 
variety of actions and play important physiological roles in the cardio-
vascular and immune systems, and in pain sensation in peripheral systems 
[6]. PGI2 and TXA2 have opposing actions, involving regulation of the 
interaction of platelets with the vascular endothelium, while PGE2, PGI2 and
PGD2 are powerful vasodilators that potentiate the action of various 
autocoids to induce plasma extravasation and pain sensation. Prostanoids 
exert their actions via membrane receptors on the surface of target cells. 
Eight main types of receptor are thought to exist: the PGD receptor (DP); 
4 subtypes of the PGE receptor (EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4); the PGF receptor
(FP); the PGI receptor (IP); and the TxA receptor (TP). All are rhodopsin-
like GPCRs, each encoded by a different gene [7].
 
PROSTANOIDR is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
prostanoid receptors. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment 
of 9 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning 
virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that 
characterise prostanoid receptors but distinguish them from closely-related 
members of the rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily - motif 1 lies within the 
first potential TM domain; and motifs 2-5 encode parts of putative TM 
domains 2, 3, 4 and 6, respectively. Three iterations on SPTR40_20f were 
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 51 
sequences was identified.      
