LOLP2ALLERGN
Grass pollen allergy is a major human health problem throughout the world, 
perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne) being one of the more important species 
causing such allergy. Several proteins from this grass pollen have been 
characterised and used to study specific serum antibody responses in
individuals allergic to pollen proteins. Such individuals often show 
concordant presence of serum antibodies to all three Lol p allergens. Most
(~95%) possess serum IgE and/or IgG antibodies to Lol p I, and ~45% have
antibodies to Lol p II and III. Both Lol p II and III are highly cross-
reactive with human, goat and rabbit antibodies. However, antibodies to 
Lol p I are unique and do not cross-react with Lol p II and III [1-6].

The amino acid sequences of Lol p II and Lol p III are highly similar,
sharing 59% identity. Both have a region of amphipathicity (residues 
61-67, Lol p III numbering) that might contain sites for binding to Ia
molecules or T cell receptors. This region is identical between Lol p II 
and III, except for an Arg-Lys substitution, and could account for the DR3 
association with responsiveness to both molecules [2,3]. However, although
Lol p II and III show significant structural similarities and antibody 
cross reactivity, it is intriguing that only Lol p III is able to induce
significant T cell responses [6]. Also interesting is that immune response
to Lol p III is associated with DR5 (in addition to DR3), whereas no DR5
association is found in Lol p II. One possibility is that Lol p III has an
additional site that binds to the DR5 Ia molecule. Indeed, Lol p III 
has a second highly amphipathic peptide (residues 24-30, RPGDTLA), which is 
different and not amphipathic in Lol II [3]. Moreover, comparison of the
sequences of DRB gene products has shown that the first hypervariable 
region (residues 9-13) of DR3 and DR5, and no other region, contains the
sequence EYSTSTS. It is thought that this sequence in the DR beta 1 
polypeptide chain is associated with the immune responsiveness to the
allergen Lol p III [4]. In addition, both allergens share similar structure
with an antibody-binding fragment for Lol p I. However, Lol p II appears to
contain unique Ia recognition sites not shared with Lol p II and III. This
could explain why Ab responses to the three allergens are associated with
DR3 and why most Lol p II and III responders are also Lol p I responders,
but Lol p I responders are not necessarily Lol p II and III responders [1].

The structure of allergen Phl p 2 from Timothy grass has been determined to
1.9A by X-ray crystallography [7], and more recently by NMR [8]. The protein
contains mainly beta structures typical of the immunoglobulin-like fold.

LOLP2ALLERGN is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
pollen allergen Lol p II family. The fingerprint was derived for an initial
alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
largely spanning the C-terminal portion of the alignment - motif 1 encodes
beta-strand 3; motif 2 includes strand 6; motif 3 spans strand 7; and motif
4 includes strand 8. A single iteration on SPTR39_17f was required to reach
convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the starting set.
