LCRVANTIGEN
Secretion of virulence factors in Gram-negative bacteria involves 
transportation of the protein across two membranes to reach the cell 
exterior [1]. There have been four secretion systems described in 
animal enteropathogens, such as Salmonella and Yersinia, with further 
sequence similarities in plant pathogens like Ralstonia and Erwinia [1]. 

The type III secretion system is of great interest, as it is used to 
transport virulence factors from the pathogen directly into the host cell 
[1] and is only triggered when the bacterium comes into close contact with
the host. The protein subunits of the system are very similar to those of 
bacterial flagellar biosynthesis [1]. However, while the latter forms a
ring structure to allow secretion of flagellin and is an integral part of
the flagellum itself [1], type III subunits in the outer membrane
translocate secreted proteins through a channel-like structure.

Effector proteins secreted by the type III system do not possess a secretion 
signal, and are considered unique because of this [1]. YopB and YopD are two 
effector proteins secreted by Yersinia spp. that facilitate the spread of 
other translocated proteins through the type III needle and the host cell 
cytoplasm [2]. In turn, the transcription of these moieties is thought to be
regulated by another gene, lcrV, found on the Yops virulon that encodes the 
entire type III system [2,3]. The product of this gene, LcrV protein, also 
regulates the secretion of YopD through the type III translocon [3,4], and 
itself acts as a protective "V" antigen for Yersinia pestis, the causative 
agent of plague [3-5].

Recently, a homologue of the Yersinia LcrV protein (PcrV) was found in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen. In vivo studies using
mice found that immunisation with the protein protected burned animals from 
infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and enhanced survival. In addition, it
is speculated that PcrV determines the size of the needle pore for type III
secreted effectors. [5,6]. 

LCRVANTIGEN is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
low calcium response V antigen family. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 10 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length. A single iteration on 
SPTR39.22_17.3f was required to reach convergence, no further sequences
being identified beyond the starting set.
