KIRCHANNEL
Potassium channels are found in virtually all cell types. Their pore-
forming subunits fall into three structural families, i.e. those possessing
six, four and two transmembrane (TM) domains. The six-TM domain K+ channels
can be further subdivided into six families: the voltage-gated K+ channels
(Kv), the KCNQ channels, the eag-like K+ channels, and three Ca2+-activated
K+ channels. Inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir) are the principal class
of two-TM domain K+ channels, and the recently-discovered two-pore domain
K+ channels, make up a family of four-TM domain K+ channels.

Inwardly rectifying potassium channels (Kir) are responsible for regulating
diverse processes including: cellular excitability, vascular tone, heart
rate, renal salt flow, and insulin release [1]. To date, around twenty
members of this superfamily have been cloned, which can be grouped into six
families by sequence similarity - these are designated Kir1.x-7.x [2,3].

Cloned Kir channel cDNAs encode proteins of between ~370-500 residues,
containing two predicted TM domains, with the characteristic K+ channel
pore-forming domain located between them. Both N- and C-termini are thought
to be cytoplasmic, and the N-terminus lacks a signal sequence. It is thought
that four Kir subunits assemble to form a tetrameric channel complex, which
may be hetero- or homomeric [1].

KIRCHANNEL is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the Kir
inward rectifer K+ channel superfamily. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 56 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved
regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - motif 1 spans the
end of the putative cytoplasmic N-terminus, and the start of the first TM
domain; motif 2 lies in the pore-forming (H5) domain; and motifs 3-6 encode
portions of the cytoplasmic C-terminus. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 58
sequences was identified. A single partial match was also found: O43401, a
a human Kir subunit lacking the N-terminal portion of these proteins,
which matches motifs 3-6.
