APOPREGMCL1
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death (PCD), is a common and evolutionarily 
conserved property of all metazoans [1]. In many biological processes, 
apoptosis is required to eliminate supernumerary or dangerous (e.g., pre-
cancerous) cells and to promote normal development. Thus, dysregulation  
of apoptosis can contribute to the development of many major diseases, 
including cancer, autoimmunity and neurodegenerative disorders. In most
cases, proteins of the caspase family execute the genetic programme that
leads to cell death. Bcl-2 proteins are central regulators of caspase
activation, and play a key role in cell death by regulating the integrity
of the mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes [2]. At 
least 20 Bcl-2 proteins have been reported in mammals, and several
others have been identified in viruses.

Bcl-2 family proteins fall roughly into three subtypes, which either promote 
cell survival (anti-apoptotic) or trigger cell death (pro-apoptotic). All 
members contain at least one of four conserved motifs, termed Bcl-2 Homology
(BH) domains. Bcl-2 subfamily proteins, which contain at least BH1 and BH2,
promote cell survival by inhibiting the adapters needed for the activation
of caspases. Pro-apoptotic members potentially exert their effects by dis-
placing the adapters from the pro-survival proteins; these proteins belong
either to the Bax subfamily, which contain BH1-BH3, or to the BH3 subfamily,
which mostly only feature BH3 [3]. Thus, the balance between antagonistic
family members is believed to play a role in determining cell fate.

Members of the wider Bcl-2 family, which also includes Bcl-x, Bcl-w and 
Mcl-1, are described by their similarity to Bcl-2 protein, a member of
the pro-survival Bcl-2 subfamily [3]. The Mcl-1 subtype appears to have 
weaker survival activity than Bcl-2, Bcl-x and Bcl-w, and is more divergent
in sequence, which may indicate additional functionality. Disruption of 
Mcl-1 in mice revealed that the gene may be required for zygote 
implantation, suggesting that its role extends beyond apoptosis [4].

APOPREGMCL1 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for Mcl-1
(myeloid cell leukaemia 1) apoptosis regulator protein. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise Mcl-1 proteins but distinguish them from
closely-related Bcl-2 family members - motif 1 lies immediately before BH1;
motif 2 resides within BH1; motif 3 spans the C-terminal portion of BH1, and
the succeeding sequence; and motifs 4 and 5 are located towards the C-
terminus. Two iterations on SPTR40_22f were required to reach convergence, 
at which point a true set comprising 6 sequences was identified.
