SECGEXPORT
Secretion across the inner membrane in some Gram-negative bacteria occurs
via the preprotein translocase pathway. Proteins are produced in the 
cytoplasm as precursors, and require a chaperone subunit to direct them to 
the translocase component. [1]. From there, the mature proteins are either 
targeted to the outer membrane, or remain as periplasmic proteins [1]. The 
translocase protein subunits are encoded on the bacterial chromosome.

The translocase itself comprises 7 proteins, including a chaperone (SecB),
an ATPase (SecA), an integral membrane complex (SecY, SecE and SecG), and
two additional membrane proteins that promote the release of the mature 
peptide into the periplasm (SecD and SecF) [1]. SecG, a subunit of the major
translocase complex, is thought to stimulate translocation activity and 
enhance the insertion-deinsertion SecA cycle [2]. Deletion studies have
revealed that in the absence of SecG, and with an imbalance of membrane
phospholipids, translocation through the SecYEG complex cannot take place.
Thus, SecG is essential for the stabilisation/function of the SecYEG complex
in the bacterial membrane under stressful cell conditions [2].  

Using SecG mutants, it has been shown that SecG has two transmembrane (TM)
domains. Both of these contribute to the recognition of preprotein signal
sequences by the translocation complex [3]. The protein also undergoes
membrane topology inversion when coupled to the SecA cycle [4]. 

SECGEXPORT is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
protein-export SecG membrane proteins. The fingerprint was derived from an
initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved 
regions spanning the N-terminal portion of the alignment - motifs 1 and 4 
encode the TM domains, and motif 2 and 3 reside in the loop between them.
Two iterations on SPTR40_18f were required to reach convergence, at which
point a true set comprising 8 sequences was identified. A single partial
match was also found, Q98ME8, a protein-export membrane protein from
Rhizobium loti that fails to make a signficant match with motifs 2 and 3.
