CXCCHMKINER3
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute a vast protein family that
encompasses a wide range of functions (including various autocrine, para-
crine and endocrine processes). They show considerable diversity at the
sequence level, on the basis of which they can be separated into distinct
groups. We use the term clan to describe the GPCRs, as they embrace a group
of families for which there are indications of evolutionary relationship,
but between which there is no statistically significant similarity in
sequence [1,2]. The currently known clan members include the rhodopsin-like
GPCRs, the secretin-like GPCRs, the cAMP receptors, the fungal mating
pheromone receptors, and the metabotropic glutamate receptor family.

The rhodopsin-like GPCRs themselves represent a widespread protein family
that includes hormone, neurotransmitter and light receptors, all of
which transduce extracellular signals through interaction with guanine
nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. Although their activating ligands vary
widely in structure and character, the amino acid sequences of the 
receptors are very similar and are believed to adopt a common structural
framework comprising 7 transmembrane (TM) helices [3-5].

Chemokines are proteins that have important physiological and patho-
physiological roles in a wide range of acute and chronic inflammatory
processes [6]. Their sequences are similar and are characterised by a
4-cysteine motif: the family can be divided according to whether the first 2
Cys residues are adjacent (the C-C family), or separated by an intervening
residue (the C-x-C family).

The C-X-C chemokines IP10, Mig and I-TAC are upregulated in response to
interferon-gamma and are potent chemoattractants for activated T cells
[8,11]. All three chemokines have been found to activate the type 3 C-X-C
chemokine receptor (CXCR3) [7,8]. CXCR3 is expressed in natural killer cells
and activated T lymphocytes but not in resting T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes,
monocytes or granulocytes [7]. CXCR3 also appears to be constitutively
expressed on endothelial cells of medium and large blood vessels [9]. Upon
binding to CXCR3, all three ligands cause mobilisation of intracellular
calcium and chemotaxis. I-TAC, however, has a much higher affinity for the
receptor and produces more potent effects than IP10 or Mig [8]. I-TAC
appears to bind to two distinct sites on CXCR3: when the receptor is in the
active conformation, all three ligands can bind, but I-TAC binds at an
allotropic site, distinct from that of IP10 and Mig. By contrast, only I-TAC
can bind to the uncoupled conformation of the receptor [10]. CXCR3 is also
capable of binding a number of CC chemokines with moderate affinity. One of
these, eotaxin, appears to act as a natural antagonist of the receptor [11].

The main role of CXCR3 and its ligands appears to be the selective
recruitment of effector T cells in both normal tissues and inflammation [8].
CXCR3 may be involved in a number of T cell-mediated inflammatory diseases,
such as autoimmune diseases, delayed-type hypersensitivity responses,
certain viral diseases and transplant rejection. Upregulation of I-TAC in
astrocytes and microglial cells by interferon suggests that it may also play
a role in neuroinflammatory diseases, such as meningitis, encephalitis and
multiple sclerosis [8]. IP10 has also been suggested to be involved in
recruitment of inflammatory cells into the brain following ischaemic injury
[12].

CXCCHMKINER3 is a 9-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
type 3 C-X-C chemokine receptor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 4 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions
spanning the full alignment length, focusing on those sections that
characterise the type 3 C-X-C chemokine receptors but distinguish them
from other members of the chemokine receptor family - motifs 1-3 reside at
the N-terminus; motif 4 spans the first cytoplasmic loop, leading into TM
domain 2; motif 5 encodes the second cytoplasmic loop; motif 6 spans the
C-terminal portion of TM domain 4; motif 7 lies in the second external loop;
motif 8 lies in the third external loop, leading into TM domain 7; and motif
9 resides at the C-terminus. A single iteration on SPTR39_15f was required
to reach convergence, no further sequences being identified beyond the 
starting set.
