OTX2HOMEOBOX
Otx proteins constitute a class of vertebrate homeodomain-containing
transcription factors that have been shown to be essential for anterior
head formation, including brain morphogenesis. They are orthologous to the
product of the Drosophila head gap gene, orthodenticle (Otd), and appear to
play similar roles in both, since the developmental abnormalities caused by
disruption of these transcription factors in one, can be recovered by
substitution of the factor(s) from the other. Such studies have provided
strong evidence that there exists a conserved genetic programme for insect
and mammalian brain development, which presumably arose in a more primitive
common ancestor [1,2].

Two vertebrate orthodenticle-related transcription factors have been
indentified, Otx1 and Otx2, which have sizes of 355 and 289 residues
respectively. They contain a bicoid-like homeodomain, which features a
conserved lysine residue at position 9 of the DNA recognition helix, which
is thought to confer high-affinity binding to TAATCC/T elements on DNA [3].
Otd-like transcription factors have also been found in zebrafish and 
certain lamprey species.

Mice completely lacking Otx2 (due to targeted gene disruption) die during
early embryogenesis. Analysis reveals that they lack the neuroectoderm
that is destined to become the forebrain, midbrain and rostral hindbrain.
They also show major abnomalities in their body plan. Mice that have
artificially-reduced levels of Otx2 develop head abnormalities reminiscent
of otocephaly [4].

OTX2HOMEOBOX is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the
Otx2 transcription factor. The fingerprint was derived from an initial 
alignment of 3 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise Otx2 but distinguish it from other Otx isoforms - motif 1
lies at the N-terminus, before the homeobox DNA-binding domain; and motifs
2-4 lie in the C-terminal half of the alignment, occuring after the poly-
glutamine tract. Two iterations on SPTR37_10f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 4 sequences was identified. 
