IGFBPFAMILY1
Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs)-I and -II are small secreted peptides 
that stimulate the survival, and promote the proliferation and 
differentiation, of many cell types [1]. In biological fluids, these growth
factors are usually bound to IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs), which regulate
their availability and activity by prolonging their half-life and 
modulating their receptor interactions.

To date, six IGFBP family members have been identified (termed IGFBP1-6)
[2]. They share a conserved gene (intron-exon) organisation and high IGF
binding affinity. Structurally, the proteins also share a common domain 
architecture, possessing a conserved N-terminal IGFBP domain, a highly 
variable mid-section, and a thyroglobulin type-1 (Tg1) domain in their 
C-terminal regions.

In addition to their role in the regulation of IGF activity, there is 
evidence for the direct association of IGFBPs with a variety of 
extracellular and cell surface molecules [3,4], with consequent effects 
upon important biological processes. These include modulation of bone cell
proliferation [5], and growth arrest of breast and prostate cancer cells 
[3,6].

IGFBP1 (also known as amniotic fluid binding protein (AFBP) and placental 
protein-12) is involved in the regulation of foetal growth: there is a 
strong inverse correlation between circulating IGFBP1 levels and foetal 
size [7]. It also functions as a survival factor and pro-regeneration
factor in the liver [8].

IGFBPFAMILY1 is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 7 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on
those sections that characterise IGFBP1 but distinguish it from other 
family members - motifs 1 and 2 reside within the IGFBP domain; motif 3 
lies immediately prior to the Tg1 domain; and motifs 4 and 5 reside within
the Tg1 domain. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f were required to reach
convergence, at which point a true set comprising 18 sequences was 
identified. Two partial matches were also found, Q5XHD1_XENLA and 
A4K8J2_DANRE, which are frog and fish sequences that fail to match motifs 
4 and 5, and motifs 3 and 5, respectively.
