FLIPRCHIPS
Formyl Peptide Receptor-Like 1 (FPRL1)-inhibitory protein (also termed
FLIPr) has been shown to inhibit calcium mobilisation in neutrophils [1].
There is evidence that FLIPr binds to FPRL1 and, at higher concentrations, 
to FPR [1], impairing the leukocyte response to FPRL1 agonists. It has
revealed unknown inflammatory ligands during S.aureus infection and, as an
FPRL1 antagonist, may facilitate development of therapeutic agents in
FPRL1-mediated inflammatory diseases [1].

Chemotaxis inhibitory protein (also knows as CHIPS) is a Staphylococcus
aureus-secreted virulence factor that impairs the response of neutrophils
and monocytes to FPR and C5a [2]. CHIPS has been shown to reduce neutrophil
recruitment toward C5a in mouse models (its activity is more potent on 
human than on mouse cells). As such, its properties may make it a
candidate new anti-inflammatory therapeutic compound [2].

CHIPS also plays an key role in bacterial invasion, by inhibiting FMLP-
and C5a-induced calcium moblisation [2]. By influencing 2 related receptors
with very different ligand specificities (C5aR and FPR), the protein has a
unique role; nevertheless, neither the manner in which it binds such
structurally different molecules nor how its expression is regulated are
currently unknown [2].

The structure of a CHIPS fragment (residues 31-121) has been solved by NMR
spectroscopy [3]. This fragment has the same activity in blocking the C5aR
relative to full-length CHIPS, but lacks FPR antagonism [3]. The protein
has a compact fold comprising 2 short alpha-helices packed onto a 4-stranded
anti-parallel beta-sheet: strands-2 and -3 are joined by a loop with a
well-defined conformation [3]. The protein shares a high degree of
structural similarity with a number of proteins, including the C-terminal 
domain of staphylococcal superantigen-like proteins (SSLs) 5 and 7, 
staphyloccocal and streptococcal superantigens TSST-1 and SPE-C, and various
domains of the staphylococcal extracellullar adherence protein (EAP) [3].

FLIPRCHIPS is a 5-element fingerprint that provides a signature for the 
FPRL1/chemotaxis inhibitory protein family. The fingerprint was derived 
from an initial alignment of 14 sequences: the motifs were drawn from 
conserved regions spanning the full alignment length - motifs 1-3 span the
N-terminal region; motif 4 spans strand 2 and helix 2, and includes
an Arg residue that appears to be involved in preservation of the structure;
and motif 5 includes strand 4. Two iterations on SPTR57.15_40.15f were
required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 70
sequences was identified. Several partial matches were also found, all of
which are FPRL1 N- and C-terminal fragments.
