AQUAPORIN3
Aquaporins form water-specific channels that provide the plasma membranes 
of red cells and kidney proximal tubules with high permeability to water,
thereby permitting water to move in the direction of an osmotic gradient.
Aquaporin amino acid sequences contain two tandem repeats, each containing
three transmembrane (TM) domains and a pore-forming loop, with the signature
motif Asn-Pro-Ala (NPA).

Aquaporin-3 (AQP3) forms a water-specific channel that renders the kidney 
medullary collecting duct highly permeability to water. It may function
as a water and urea exit mechanism in antidiuresis in collecting duct cells,
and is also slightly permeable to urea and glycerol. It may also play an
important role in gastrointestinal tract water transport and in glycerol
metabolism. It is widely expressed in epithelial cells of kidney (collecting
ducts [1]) and airways, in keratinocytes, immature dendritic cells and
erythrocytes. Expression studies have shown that cells transfected with AQP3
cDNA react strongly with anti-GIL antibodies [2]. These studies hence report
the first cases of human AQP3 deficiency and offer the molecular basis of a
new blood group system, GIL, believed to be encoded by AQP3 [2].

AQUAPORIN3 is an 8-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
aquaporin-3. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 7
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length - motifs 1 and 2 span the cytoplasmic N-terminus; motif 3
includes the second half of the second TM region and part of the following
cytoplasmic region; motif 4 is found in the cytoplasmic domain between TM
regions 2 and 3; motif 5 spans the third TM region; motif 6 spans part of 
the cytoplasmic region preceding the fifth TM region and the beginning of
the TM region itself; motif 7 spans the end of the sixth TM region and the
beginning of the C-terminal domain; and motif 8 resides entirely within the
cytoplasmic C-terminal region. Three iterations on SPTR57_40f were required
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 17 sequences was
identified. Eight partial matches were also found, all of which are 
fragments or family members that fail to make significant matches with one
or more motifs.
