INSLNLIKEGF1
The insulin family of proteins groups together several evolutionarily
related active peptides [1]: these include insulin [2,3], relaxin [4,5],
insect prothoracicotropic hormone (bombyxin) [6], insulin-like growth
factors (IGF1 and IGF2) [7,8], mammalian Leydig cell-specific insulin-like
peptide (gene INSL3), early placenta insulin-like peptide (ELIP) (gene 
INSL4), locust insulin-related peptide (LIRP), molluscan insulin-related
peptides (MIP) and Caenorhabditis elegans insulin-like peptides. The 3D
structures of a number of family members have been determined [7-9]. The
fold comprises two polypeptide chains (A and B) linked by two disulphide 
bonds: all share a conserved arrangement of 4 cysteines in their A chain,
the first of which is linked by a disulphide bond to the third, while the
second and fourth are linked by interchain disulphide bonds to cysteines
in the B chain.

The IGFs, or somatomedins, play a key role in pre-adolescent mammalian 
growth. IGFI expression is regulated by growth hormone and mediates post-
natal growth [10]. Defects in IGF1 are the cause of insulin-like growth
factor I deficiency (IGF1 deficiency), an autosomal recessive disorder
characterised by growth retardation, sensorineural deafness and mental
retardation [11].

INSLNLIKEGF1 is a 4-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
insulin-like growth factor I. The fingerprint was derived from an initial
alignment of 18 sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions 
spanning virtually the full alignment length, focusing on those sections
that characterise insulin-like growth factor I but distinguish it from 
closely related members of the insulin family. Three iterations on 
SPTR55_38f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 93 sequences was identified. A single partial matches was also
found, Q91442_SQUAC, an insulin-like growth factor I from Squalus acanthias
(Spiny dogfish) that fails to make a signficant match with motif 4.
