RCMT9
RNA (C5-cytosine) methyltransferases (RCMTs) catalyse the transfer of a 
methyl group to the 5th carbon of a cytosine base in RNA sequences to 
produce C5-methylcytosine. RCMTs use the cofactor S-adenosyl-L-methionine 
(SAM) as a methyl donor [1]. The catalytic mechanism of RCMTs involves an
attack by the thiolate of a Cys residue on position 6 of the target cytosine
base to form a covalent link, thereby activating C5 for methyl-group 
transfer. Following the addition of the methyl group, a second Cys residue
acts as a general base in the beta-elimination of the proton from the 
methylated cytosine ring. The free enzyme is restored and the methylated
product is released [2].

Numerous putative RCMTs have been identified in archaea, bacteria and
eukaryota [3,4]; most are predicted to be nuclear or nucleolar proteins [5].
The Escherichia coli Ribosomal RNA Small-subunit Methyltransferase Beta
(RSMB) FMU (FirMicUtes) represents the first protein identified and
characterised as a cytosine-specific RNA methyltransferase. RSMB was
reported to catalyse the formation of C5-methylcytosine at position 967 of
16S rRNA [6,7].

A classification of RCMTs has been proposed on the basis of sequence
similarity [3]. According to this classification, RCMTs are divided into
8 distinct subfamilies [3]. Recently, a new RCMT subfamily, termed RCMT9,
was identified [4]. Members of the RCMT contain a core domain, responsible
for the cytosine-specific RNA methyltransferase activity. This 'catalytic'
domain adopts the Rossmann fold for the accommodation of the cofactor SAM
[8]. The RCMT subfamilies are also distinguished by N-terminal and
C-terminal extensions, variable both in size and sequence [3].    

As mentioned above, RCMT9 is a novel subtype of RCMT-related proteins. 
Putative orthologues of this subfamily have been detected only in
Viridiplantae, Alveolata, Euglenozoa and Mycetozoa taxa. Members of this
group are distantly related to the Nuclear protein 1 (NCL1) subfamily [4]. 

RCMT9 is an 3-element fingerprint that provides a signature for  
RNA (C5-cytosine) methyltransferase subfamily 9. The fingerprint was 
derived from an initial alignment of 6 sequences: the motifs were drawn
from conserved regions spanning virtually the full alignment length - 
motifs 1 and 2 reside at the N-terminus; and motif 3 lies in the core
'catalytic' region. Two iterations on SPTR57.15_40.15f were required 
to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 14 sequences 
was identified. Four partial matches were also found, all of which are
fragments: Q2V2U2_ARATH and Q8W0S4_SORBI lack the portion of sequence
bearing motif 1; Q9FKW7_ARATH lacks the portion of sequence bearing motif 2;
and B8AGB7_ORYSI lacks part of the sequence bearing motif 3.
