AQUAPORIN1
Aquaporins form water-specific channels that provide the plasma membranes 
of red cells and kidney proximal tubules with high permeability to water,
thereby permitting water to move in the direction of an osmotic gradient.
Aquaporin amino acid sequences contain two tandem repeats, each containing
three transmembrane (TM) domains and a pore-forming loop, with the signature
motif Asn-Pro-Ala (NPA).

Aquaporin-1 is the major water channel present in the kidney proximal renal
tubule. Members of the family contain approximately 275 amino acids.
Aquaporin-1 is under complex regulation, including hormones and homeostatic
factors like hypertonicity [1]. It is also expressed in red blood cells, the
gastrointestinal tract, lungs and in the brain, where it may have a role in
cerebral oedema after surgery or trauma [2]. Apart from controlling the
water balance of the organism [3,4], aquaporin-1 is thought to have an 
impact on various cellular processes, such as angiogenesis, and cell
migration and metastasis observed in some human malignancies. Its expression
has also been proposed as a characteristic feature of an aggressive
sub-group of breast carcinomas.

AQUAPORIN1 is a 6-element fingerprint that provides a signature for
aquaporin-1. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 8 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full 
alignment length - motif 1 spans the cytoplasmic N-terminus and the
beginning of the first putative TM domain; motif 2 includes the extra-
cellular domain between TM regions 1 and 2; motif 3 includes the beginning
of the extracellular region between helices 3 and 4; motif 4 includes the
end of the same extracellular region and the beginning of TM region 4; and
motifs 5 and 6 reside in the cytoplasmic C-terminal region. Four iterations
on SPTR57_40f were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set 
comprising 20 sequences was identified. Nine partial matches were also
found, all of which are fragments or family members that fail to make
significant matches with one or more motifs.
