AQUAPORIN12
Aquaporins form water-specific channels that provide the plasma membranes 
of red cells and kidney proximal tubules with high permeability to water,
thereby permitting water to move in the direction of an osmotic gradient.
Aquaporin amino acid sequences contain two tandem repeats, each containing
three transmembrane (TM) domains and a pore-forming loop, with the signature
motif Asn-Pro-Ala (NPA).

Aquaporin-11 and aquaporin-12 (AQP12) belong to a new aquaporin subfamily
termed superaquaporins [1]. AQP12 is exclusively found in pancreatic acinar
cells [2], and is not localised in the plasma membrane. No specific
localisation has yet been established for this subfamily, but its presence
in the pancreas implies some role in the secretion of digestive enzymes [2] 
and fluids in the pancreatic cells [3]. A structural characteristic of
AQP12 is the lack of a cytoplasmic N-terminal region, by contrast with all
other known aquaporins.

AQUAPORIN12 is a 12-element fingerprint that provides a signature for 
aquaporin-12. The fingerprint was derived from an initial alignment of 3 
sequences: the motifs were drawn from conserved regions spanning the full
alignment length - motif 1 lies in the first putative TM domain; motifs 2-4
span the extracellular domain between TM regions 1 and 2; motif 5 lies in
the cytoplasmic region between TM domains 2 and 3; motif 6 encodes part of
the third TM region; motif 7 lies in the extracellular region between TM
domains 3 and 4; motif 8 spans the end of the extracellular region and part
of the fourth TM domain; motif 9 encodes the cytoplasmic region between TM
domains 4 and 5; motif 10 spans the end of the extracellular region between
TM domains 5 and 6 and part of the sixth TM domain; and motifs 11 and 12
reside in the cytoplasmic C-terminal region. Two iterations on SPTR57_40f
were required to reach convergence, at which point a true set comprising 6 
sequences was identified. A single partial matches was found, Q63ZK8_XENLA,
a distantly related family member that matches motifs 10-12.
